





                                     CHAPTER 2
                         Opposing Positions Within Mexico


   There are always arguments to limit, postpone, or detract from
democracy.  It is always too late or too early.  Enrique Krauze, 1983. 

   Down in Chihuahua, there ain't nothin' much to do.  Song by Ralph Yaw
and Johnny Richards, 1947.
        
   The PRI believes that the only party qualified to govern is it.  Heberto
Castillo, 1986




The Players and the Stakes
   Struggles for political power and income shares have been at the heart of
government decisions made in Mexico during the last 50 years.  In a society
where incremental change has been the norm, at least since the 1910 Revolution,
interests are durable once they are vested, and the ability of earlier winners to
maintain their gains has been a major feature of the modern Mexican scene. 
   The big winners of the past 50 years have been the business community,
professionals, such as lawyers and engineers, organized labor, large-scale farmers,
and the bureaucracy, both in government and in the official party.  These groups
dominate the political structure and have the largest incomes.  Those who have
benefited less include unorganized labor, small farmers, especially those
cultivating crops in rainfed areas, and persons flooding into cities because of the
lack of opportunity in rural areas. Intellectuals have mostly been in the more
privileged group.  The absolute incomes of most groups rose when the GDP was
growing at more than 3 percent per capita each year, but even then the spread
between the income of the poor and the rich widened.  The absolute incomes of
practically all groups have been declining since 1982, but the share going to
labor has declined and that to business has increased.
   President Echeverria attempted to alter the division of political power and
national income through essentially superficial means that involved coopting many
radical young people into the PRI and the government and using government
expenditures to make income distribution more equal.  But the class divisions
were not altered; Echeverria accomplished little more than to stimulate the
earlier winners to organize themselves more effectively to stave off future
attempts at political and economic redistribution.
   Another attempt at economic change is now taking place, driven not by a
social ideology of income redistribution but by imperatives of efficiency.  The
change involves the opening of the Mexican economy, and if carried to its
logical conclusion, future economic development will be more export-led than in
the past.  A different array of interests, only partially overlapping with the past
division, will be vested.
   The political challenge also deals with opening the political system to truly
democratic freedom of choice, or maintaining a system where a dominant party
will continue to make major decisions in internal cabals.  These related issues
involve the very nature of Mexico's future; their outcomes could change thestatus quo as thoroughly as did all the institutionalized revolution of the past
half century.

Buildup to the Present
   The continuity of a single party in power in Mexico for 60 years has been a
remarkable feature of the world scene.  The precursor to the current PRI was
established in 1928-1929 and the same party, twice renamed, has dominated
Mexican politics ever since.  The name, the Institutional Revolutionary Party, is
an oxymoron designed to connote constant change, but that change has hardly
been revolutionary.  Continuity rather than revolution better describes
developments since the 1930s.  
   There were nine presidents from Lazaro Cardenas (1934-1940) to Miguel de la
Madrid (1982-1988), each serving a single six-year term mandated by the
constitution.  Policy shifts over this period were not radical and reflected the
relative emphasis different administrations gave to such issues as land reform,
the content and philosophy of the economic development program, and the weight
assigned to economic growth as compared with a more egalitarian income
distribution.  Lazaro Cardenas is best remembered in Mexico for his social
program, in particular land reform, as well as the oil nationalization; Miguel
Aleman for the development of Mexican industry behind protective walls; and
Luis Echeverria for seeking to change the development model from what had
been called stabilizing growth to shared development.  Miguel de la Madrid will
be remembered for his policy of economic opening at a time of economic
hardship.
   In terms of absolute economic growth, the PRI achieved good results from the
1930s through the 1970s.  This economic miracle, as it was called, of 50 years of
consistent increases in gross domestic product (GDP), averaging around 6 percent
a year, altered Mexico from an economic backwater to a potential middle-level
power.  It helps explain the durability of the PRI, and absence of economic
growth since 1982 is a major reason for the disillusion with the PRI evident in
Mexico today.  Qualified democracy was an acceptable form of governance as
long as the system provided economic growth of 2.5 to 3 percent per capita,
year in and year out.
   Economics does not wholly explain the PRI's durability.  Cardenas established
a corporatist support structure for the official party which, in the main, has
persisted to this day.   The original elements in this structure included labor,
the peasants, and the military.  The military was later dropped and a diverse
urban group was added; arrangements between the political elite and military
commanders are now accomplished outside the formal organizational structure of
the PRI.     
   The labor pillar, the Confederacion de Trabajadores Mexicanos (Confederation
of Mexican Workers--CTM), remains the most important labor confederation in
Mexico.  Fidel Velazquez, now an octogenarian, has been its leader since 1941,
and remains a significant personage on the Mexican political scene.  But his
power is easily overstated -- while he can obtain limited favors for organized
labor because the CTM is part of the official party, he is also a captive of the
party.  Today, organized labor in Mexico is complex and the CTM is far from
holding a monopoly on the loyalty of working men and women.    
   The peasant support group, the Confederacion Nacional Campesina (National
Peasants' Confederation--CNC) is the party's main force for organizing the
countryside, but like the CTM, is no longer as influential as it once was.
Mexico's population, 80 percent rural in the Cardenas period, and 70 percent
urban in the mid-1980s, is a significant factor in this weakening, since a lower
proportion of the population diminishes rural power.  Another is rural
dissatisfaction with the benefits provided by the official party to impoverished
peasants as compared with wealthy landowners.   Nevertheless, the CNC remains
important in mobilizing the countryside and delivering the peasant vote in
support of PRI candidates. 
   The "popular" segment of the party, added in 1942, is the Confederacion
Nacional de Organizaciones Populares (National Confederation of Popular
Organizations--CNOP).  While the CNOP provides some basis for urban political
organization by pulling together diverse groups, it is more inchoate conceptually
than the other two.  
   The one significant group omitted from the structure established by Cardenas
was private business and industry and this omission persists.  Nevertheless,
business has been the main beneficiary of the political stability and economic
growth that Mexico enjoyed for half a century.  The PRI established a system of
benefits for business without formal representation and representation for labor
and campesinos with lesser benefits.

The Pressure Groups
   Those who benefited from Mexico's development practices developed a vested
interest against major change and sought to defend this interest each time it
was challenged.  Mancur Olson's book, The Rise and Decline of Nations, deals
primarily with developed, industrial democracies, but its thesis that extended
political stability leads to the entrenchment of powerful self-interested lobbies
that eventually frustrate national economic efficiency is certainly applicable to
Mexico.
   The self-interested basis of positions is obviously not stated as such in
Mexico or elsewhere; the arguments are phrased in more lofty terms, to defend a
system in the interest of national progress.  As elsewhere, slogans embedded in
national history are used extensively.  The Revolution and the symbolism
surrounding its evocation arouse powerful emotions in Mexico and, hence, a party
of the status quo, the Institutional Revolutionary Party calls itself revolutionary. 
The justification for continuation of policy, with only modest changes at the
margin, carried conviction as long as policy was succeeding, as it was for some
50 years until the 1980s.  In addition to the persistent economic growth during
that period, the majority of Mexicans benefited in other ways, for example,
increases in life expectancy and education.  Table 2.1 shows that these
benefits were substantial.  However, the 1968 student demonstrations and the
attempt during the Echeverria administration to redistribute the benefits of the
system demonstrated that, below the surface, all was not well.  Many Mexican 
intellectuals preceded Echeverria in their concern about the inequalities in
Mexican society.  The concern about the autocratic nature of governance has
now become substantial.  

                               Business and Industry
   The key elements of the post-World War II Mexican economic model, at least
until the mid-1980s, were a large state sector, a protected industrial structure,
requirements to purchase most intermediate goods used for industrial production
within Mexico, limits on foreign direct investment, and an overvalued exchange
rate that permitted imports of needed intermediate and capital goods at what
amounted to subsidized prices.  The development-from-within model placed little                   Table 2.1  Mexican Quality of Life Indicators,
                             Selected Years, 1940-1984


                                         1940      1950      1960      1970      1980      1984

GNP per capita (in dollars)                73       178       344       692      2090      2040
Population (in millions)                   19        26        35        48        70        77
Life expectancy at birth1                  40        56        58        62        65        66
Crude birth rate per 1,000 population      43        45        45        45        37        33
Crude death rate per 1,000 population      23        16        12        10         7         7
Infant mortality at age less than
  1 year per 1,000 live births            123        96        78        80        56        51
Child death rate, age 1-4
  1,000 children                          112        28        14        10         4         3
Urban population, percent                  35        43        51        59        68        69
Population per physician                8,647     2,400     1,830     1,445     1,260     1,140
Persons enrolled in primary school
  as percent of 6-11 age group2         n.a.         64        80       106       120       121
Persons enrolled in secondary school
  as percent age group 12-17            n.a.          2        11        18        37        51
Persons enrolled in higher education
  as percent of age group               n.a.          3         3         6        15        15


Source:   World Bank, World Development Report, various issues; when information not available
          there, other sources consistent with that were used:  United Nations, Demographic
          Yearbook, various issues; United Nations, Statistical Yearbook, various issues;
          Secretaria de la Economia Nacional, Anuario estadistico, 1940; Nacional Financiera, La
          economia mexicana en cifras, 1978; Banco de Mexico, Asamblea general ordinario
          de accionistas, 1939-1941.

n.a. = Not available.

1Number of years newborn children would live subject to mortality risks prevailing for
 for the cross-section of population at birth.

2The years since 1970 show more enrollment than there were persons aged 6 through 11.

stress on exports, and of the overvalued exchange rate caused many exports to
be subsidized.  The policies were not unique to Mexico in the postwar period,
but their survival even after their inefficiency was demonstrable reflected the
power of vested interests.  The power of protectionist interests was
demonstrated by small-scale industrialists who succeeded in keeping Mexico out
of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) in the Lopez Portillo
administration because the implication of GATT membership was that the
protective structure would gradually be reduced.
   Many Mexican business organizations exist by law.  These include chambers of
specific industries and several large confederations.  The two large obligatory
business chambers, one for industry and the other for commerce, are the
Confederation of National Chambers of Industry (Confederacion de Camaras
Industriales - Concamin) and the Confederation of National Chambers of
Commerce (Confederacion de Camaras Nacionales de Comercio - Concanaco). 
Local, state, and national chambers, which include firms of all sizes, are
affiliated with the large confederations.  These confederations sometimes criticize
government economic policies, but their diversified membership normally requires
bland positions to achieve consensus.
   Other business groupings were formed independently precisely to counter
government positions with which powerful business leaders disagreed.  Two of
these deserve mention.  The Mexican Employers' Confederation (Confederacion
Patronal de la Republica Mexicana - Coparmex) was founded in Monterrey during
the Cardenas administration to serve as an opposing voice to the president's
leftist orientation.  The Businessmen's Coordinating Council (Consejo Coordinador
Empresarial--CCE), established during the Echeverria administration to provide a
focus for business opposition to many of his policies, has become particularly
important because its membership includes the major national organizations.  It
undertakes more substantial research, through its Centro de Estudios Economicos
del Sector Privado (Private Sector Center for Economic Studies - CEESP), than
other business organizations and this adds to its influence.
   Table 2.2 summarizes the sizes of the leading business organizations.
   The government influences the appointment of mandatory national
confederation leaders.  Indeed, some, such as Canacintra, the National Chamber
of Manufacturing Industries, have been described as captives of the government. 
The government has less control over the voluntary organizations, which have
become powerful voices of dissent; indeed they are among the most powerful in
the society.  Mexico's political system, authoritarian though it is, has permitted
this diversity.
   Despite the adversarial relationship that exists between the government and
many business organizations, there has been cooperation of a basic nature that
has taken many forms: protection of and large subsidies to national industries;
favoritism to national industry in government procurement; support to national
industry in meeting external debts following the financial crisis in 1982; and the
tacit division under which the government puts into place the necessary
infrastructure to facilitate the wellbeing of the private sector.  Except at
moments of heightened conflict, the struggle for dominance between the public
and private sectors usually is dwarfed by the vast area of cooperation.  This
cooperation has helped make private business the main beneficiary of the
institutional "revolution."
   The overt conflicts include such economic issues as the size of the public
deficit, the availability of credit to the private sector, the exchange rate, and 

             Table 2.2  Main Mexican Business and Industrial Groupings

                                                Affiliated Enterprises

Concamin                                        71 industrial chambers (more
                                                  than 100,000 firms)
Canacintra                                      86,000 enterprises
Concanaco                                       261 chambers plus 120 members
                                                  (more than 400,000 firms)
Coparmex                                        297 enterprises plus 3,250
                                                  members
Anierm                                          850 enterprises plus 1,500
                                                  members
Cemai                                           212 members
CCE1                                            7 confederations

Source:  Personal inquiry of each grouping, May 14-15, 1987.

Concamin:  Confederacion Nacional de Camaras Industriales, Confederation of
             National Chambers of Industry.

Canacintra:  Camara Nacional de la Industria de Transformacion, National
             Chamber of Manufacturing Industries.

Concanaco:  Confederacion de Camaras Nacionales de Comercio, Confederation of
             National Chambers of Commerce.

Coparmex:  Confederacion Patronal de la Republica Mexicana, Mexican Employer's
             Confederation.

Anierm:  Asociacion Nacional de Importadores y Exportadores de la Republica
             Mexicana, National Association of Importers and Exporters of the
             Republic of Mexico.

Cemai:  Consejo Empresarial Mexicano para Asuntos Internacionales.  Mexican
             Entrepreneurial Council for International Affairs.

CCE:  Consejo Coordinador Empresarial, Businessmen's Coordinating Council.

   1The CCE membership includes Concamin, Concanaco, Coparmex, Asociacion
Mexicana de Instituciones de Seguros (Mexican Asociation of Insurance
Institutions), Asociacion Mexicana de Casas de Bolsa (Mexican Association of
Stockbrokers), Consejo Mexicano de Hombres de Negocios (Mexican Council of
Businessmen), and Consejo Nacional Agropecuario (National Agricultural Council).
especially the direct and regulatory involvement of the government in activities
which the private sector believes should be reserved to it.  However, there is no
unanimous business position on any of these specific economic issues.  The head
of the CCE may criticize the large public-sector deficit, as he has done, but
most businesspersons silently acquiesce in the deficit as long as it leads to
procurement of their output.   Those businesses engaged in export deplored the
existence of an overvalued peso, but the greater number engaged primarily in
producing for the domestic market preferred overvaluation as a way to acquire
imported inputs more cheaply, as long as other devices kept out competitive
imports.  
   These differences in self-interests are what make the economic opening so
laden with conflict within the business community.  The small industrialist fears
that he may be converted from a protected winner to a less-protected victim.   
His very business survival may be at issue.   Some larger-scale industrialists fear
that a less sheltered economy will translate into advantages for multinational
corporations (MNCs), which already dominate many export areas, in no small part
because of their ability to trade in intermediate products with their parents and
other affiliated companies.
   The full array of new winners and losers from the economic changes now
taking place will depend on the degree of opening, the period allowed for
adjustment, and the precise positioning of particular companies.  What is certain,
however, is that the economic opening does force change in industrial and
commercial practices.  For example, there was a major business premium in the
past in having influence in the government.  This influence could determine the
degree of import protection and exemptions from import duties for goods
necessary for production. The importance of cozy favoritism will not now
disappear, but it will become less  pervasive if import protection is more modest. 
Any analysis of corruption in Mexico must deal not only with overt bribery,
excessive enrichment of public officials, and the spoils for members of the PRI,
but also with the discretionary use of import licenses and import exemptions. 
An open economy has less scope for these  discrete, discretionary life-and-death
sentences by officials for specific businesses. 
   The peak business organizations, such as CCE, Concamin, and Coparmex, are
on record in favor of economic opening, believing their future is more promising
under an industrial structure closely intertwined with the world economy. They
also see enhanced power for themselves if the government's roles as  regulator
and competitor are diminished.  However, these organizations do not speak for
the entire private sector, except on the most general level. When the CCE brings
along its member organizations in favor of opening, it does so by compromises
that will have to be struck and re-struck as the liberalization process deepens.  
   Economic opening coupled with privatization will shift the fulcrum of the
mixed economy in favor of the private side.  This would turn the Cardenas
vision topsy turvy. For many Mexicans with a visceral antipathy toward closer
economic relations with the United States and for those with a Marxist bent in
their political-economic thinking, this corollary of structural adjustment is a
cause of concern. 
   The forces driving the debate are therefore both ideological and practical.
The philosophic aspect is the familiar conflict between a state-led versus a
private-dominated process of development.  The Mexican mixture has had a large
dose of state involvement ever since Cardenas, and  it expanded under
Echeverria.  It is now diminishing, a change that stirs deep passions in Mexico
on both sides.  The practical issue has to do with how discrete groups fare in
the shift from a mostly closed to a more open economy.  This is a pocketbook
issue and, as such, arouses fierce defenses.  The political lobbying taking place
in Mexico in support of positions on both elements of the debate is intense
precisely because so much is involved in the outcome.

                                       Labor
   There is no agreement among experts on the size of Mexico's employment and
labor force, partly because there is no satisfactory way to measure part-time
employment.  One respected Mexican analyst estimated the economically active
population (persons seeking employment) at 22 million in 1980, a figure which
increased by about 5 million by 1987.  Males aged 12 and over had a 7l percent
participation rate in the labor force in 1980 and females only 21.5 percent.  The
male participation rate has declined since 1950, when it was 88 percent, and
female participation has increased from the 13 percent at that time.  Both males
and females between 12 and 24 are staying in school longer.  
   Open unemployment in Mexico was traditionally low, ranging between 3 and 6
percent, but now exceeds 15 percent as a result of the economic decline since
1982.  Underemployment affects between 30 and 40 percent of the economically
active population, but underemployment is an elusive concept, and hard to
measure.  Measurement is usually based on hours of work or level of income, but
this leaves out the intentions of part-time workers, a factor particularly hard to
gauge for female and school-age workers.  If young people are staying in school
longer, this should not be considered underemployment, though sometimes it is. 
Mexico's frequently cited need to create about 900,000 to one million new jobs
yearly may be overstated if there is a persistent surge in young males and
females staying in school.
   One other problem with the underemployment measurement is that the
underground economy is not captured in official statistics.  CEESP, the research
arm of the CCE, concluded that in 1985 this constituted between 25 and 38
percent of the measured GDP.
   Finally, measuring labor's welfare also depends on how it is defined: as
organized labor affiliated with the PRI; organized labor outside the PRI;
nonorganized workers; urban or rural workers; full-time or part-time workers; or
simply people who hustle for a living and are not captured in most official
figures.
   Organized labor and groups advocating structural reform often conflict.
Leopoldo Solis offers an economist's technical reasons for this: unions seek wage
increases in excess of productivity gains; they impede labor mobility through
efforts at job security; and their members share in the profits of oligopolistic,
natural-resource, and publicly-owned industries. Solis also notes that support of
the PRI is the quid pro quo for labor's wage and fringe benefits from
nationalized industries.
   How well has labor as a whole fared under the state-directed, import-
substitution economic model?  Even looking only at the good years, roughly from
the 1940s until the end of the 1970s, the answer is ambiguous. The average
minimum wage increased fourfold in real terms between 1950 and 1980 and many
industrial wages rose by even more.  However, not everyone was working full
time and a broader view of how the average Mexican fared can be obtained by
examining income distribution figures.  As can be seen in table 2.3, a substantial
segment of the Mexican population -- what the person in the street would
consider the working man and woman, certainly the potential working man and
woman -- was in a worse relative position at the end of the good years than
before them.  This becomes even more clear in table 2.4 (which is extracted
from the more complete table 2.3), which shows that the 40 percent of
households at the bottom of the income scale received 12.6 percent of total
income in 1950 and only 11.8 percent in 1977 (the most recent year for which
there are consistent income-distribution data). 
   The ambiguity of how labor fared in the good years becomes unambiguous
when examining more recent periods.  Figure 2.1 shows the sharp, indeed
startling, decline in real wages starting in 1982.
   Another indicator of how poorly labor has fared since the economy started to
decline is that salaries as a proportion of gross national expenditures declined
from 37.4 percent in 1981 to 28.8 percent in 1983 and have stayed at that level
or declined further ever since. By contrast, the share going to capital, including
depreciation, rose over that period from 54.6 percent to 60.9 percent.  (In the
United States at the close of 1986, compensation of employees was 74 percent of
national income.)
   By whatever measure one uses, labor has not done well in the 1980s.  This is
true whether one looks at labor's absolute position or its treatment relative to
business or professional groups.   The situation has differentiated among labor
groups, but the distinctions in recent years have been on the magnitudes of the
income declines.
   This raises the logical question of whether labor has benefited from its
affiliation with the PRI.  Because it is incorporated into the PRI, labor leaders
help draft political platforms and are appointed to many executive and legislative
positions in the central government and the states, but the economic system has
not been particularly kind to most working men and women.  For industrial                             Table 2.3  Family Income Distribution in Mexico
                                     (percent of income by deciles)


Deciles           1950      1956      1958      1963      1968      1970      19752     19772  
(In ascending
order)    
I                  2.3       1.8       2.3       1.6       1.5       1.4       0.5       1.2
II                 2.9       2.4       3.2       2.0       2.1       2.3       1.7       2.4
III                3.0       3.8       4.0       3.4       3.7       3.5       2.8       3.5
IV                 4.4       4.5       5.0       3.4       3.8       4.5       4.0       4.7
V                  4.6       5.7       6.0       5.1       7.9       5.4       5.4       6.0
VI                 6.5       7.5       7.5       6.1       8.2       8.2       6.9       7.4
VII                7.4       9.1       8.3       7.8       8.2       8.2       8.8       9.3
VIII              10.1      11.0      10.7      12.3       8.2      10.4      11.7      12.1
IX                14.4      17.5      17.2      16.4      17.7      16.6      16.9      17.0
X1                10.4      10.3      10.2      13.0      10.4      11.5      41.6      36.3
                  33.7      26.2      25.4      28.5      27.8      27.7

Sources:  From 1950 to 1970, Salvador Kalifa-Assad, "Income Distribution in Mexico:
          A Reconsideration of the Distribution Problem," pp. 56 ff.
          From 1975 to 1977, Joel Bergsman, "Income Distribution and Poverty in Mexico,"
          p. 13.

Figures may not add due to rounding.

1This decile is divided into two groups, the first from 90-95 percent and the second
  from 96 to 100 percent.

2Adjusted with income elasticity of under-reporting = 0.95.




             Table 2.4  Income Distribution in Mexico
            Percent of family income in selected years


   Income Grouping                    1950                1977

   Lowest 40 percent                  12.6                11.8
   Fifth to seventh deciles           18.5                22.7
   Eighth and ninth deciles           24.5                29.1
   Top 10 percent                     44.1                36.3


Source: See Table 2.3.           


                      Figure 2.1  Index of Real Minimum Wages
                                   (1980 = 100)














Sources:  Banco de Mexico, Indicadores economicos for the national consumer  
          price index; Informe presidencial, 1986, statistical appendix
          for average daily minimum wage (except for 1979, for which the index
          was calculated using Bank of Mexico aggregate indicators of the 
          economy).

Note:     The results show comparable declines in real wages if 1978 is set at
          100, or if manufacturing industry wages are used instead of minimum
          wages.
workers during the good years, times were good; more than 90 percent of
industrial workers were organized and their real wages increased steadily over
that period.  Workers affiliated with the large state-owned enterprises, such as
Pemex, also fared well.  But nonorganized labor has largely been left by the
wayside, certainly in relative terms, in sharing the benefits of the Mexican
economic system.
   Even though labor has borne the brunt of the economic adjustment since
1982, there has been relative labor peace.  The New York Times quoted an
anonymous diplomat: "In return for the political power that the CTM has and
which Don Fidel (its leader) can wield, the payoff is that the CTM keeps the
workers under control and in the workplace."   The tradeoff seems of
questionable value for the bulk of Mexican labor and the durability of this
bargain must therefore be questioned.  The succession to Don Fidel will be a
particularly vulnerable time.
   Organized labor has consented to the ongoing economic modernization
program, but the approval has been grudging, similar to that of the small
industrialist.  Each supports the political-economic structure developed since the
1930s, and although it is relevant that organized labor has benefited less
economically than the small industrialist, it is not decisive.  Organized labor has
had compensating political benefits.  The tradeoff between political power, which
accrues mainly to labor leaders, and economic benefits, which can be more
universally spread, is a hard one to calculate.  The expectation that political
influence will lead to higher wages has not prevailed in recent years. 
Nevertheless, the organized labor leadership affiliated with the PRI supports the
government and has accepted steady declines in real wages, even while
complaining.  It has accepted economic opening, without any enthusiasm. 
Organized labor will probably act like Canacintra -- consent as economic opening
proceeds, because it is a program the authorities on which each group depends
have dictated, but both groups will want to keep the process as slow and as
incomplete as possible.  Organized labor leaders fear that a more open industrial
structure would adversely affect wages in order to meet world competition; and
that significant economic change would alter the comfortable labor-government
political relationship.
   Unorganized labor speaks with no clear voice, although in 1987 it constituted
65 percent of the economically active population of about 27 million.  This labor
majority has no settled position on economic opening.  Views purporting to come
from this group are given by leaders of organized labor.  Unorganized labor
undoubtedly has not really thought much about the issue of economic opening; it
is too busy coping with survival.

                                   Other Groups
   As with unorganized labor, the question of economic modernization hardly
creates a ripple among most Mexican farmers, particularly the ejidatarios and
others who eke out a living from nonirrigated land.  These farmers produce
mostly for their own consumption and for internal sale.  They worry about other
issues, such as product prices, credit, and the availability of water and other
inputs at a reasonable cost.  Large landowners, who do export and are closely
allied with agricultural and agroindustrial interests in the United States, have
already modernized.  They may want protection against imports of competitive
products, but they also want access to the U.S. market.
   The military must also be mentioned.  Once the transition to civilian rule
took place in 1946, the overt political role of the military mostly disappeared.  It
has not completely disappeared because of concerns over instability near the
Guatemalan border; but as one U.S. analyst has noted, the military considers
itself to be the guardian of the political system.  Military expenditures in
Mexico constituted about 3 percent of GDP in 1980, and the military is therefore
only a modest factor in the Mexican economy.  But it could become an
important one in the event of instability.  
   Professional groups have fared well under the Mexican economic system until
recently.  So did many intellectuals, but the economic downturn has hurt both.
Researchers lack funds to pursue their metiers; educators must augment incomes
to live in a manner to which they have become accustomed; engineers and
architects are hurt by the slowdown in construction; doctors and lawyers must
operate in a less vigorous economy.  These groups are still privileged compared
with unorganized labor and most rural residents, but their absolute economic
position has deteriorated and this has affected their behavior.
   Since intellectual leadership in Mexico comes largely from these groups, their
attitudes will have great influence on Mexico's future.  Educators and writers
are taking active positions on economic opening, some against, others in favor. 
Complaints about official corruption come mainly from these professional and
intellectual groups; they are not generally the beneficiaries of the corruption
that exists.  The economic decline has also focused their attention on the
shortcomings of the political system and they have become more vocal advocates
of change.
   Intellectual currents in Mexico are difficult to sort out when it comes to
economic policy.  There is pride in past Mexican achievement as well as
disaffection because of the large numbers of people excluded from the fruits of
this accomplishment.  The economic debate among academics is often vitriolic
and terms like Marxist and neoclassicist are thrown about loosely as pejoratives. 
Intellectuals are often sought out as allies by groups with self-interested
objectives: the government seeks their support for its policy of economic
opening; so does big business; small industry and organized labor seek intellectual
backing for limited opening of the economy. 
   There is more disaffection among professionals and intellectuals today than at
at any time since the 1930s, with the possible exception of 1968, a time of
student riots.   This malaise is the result of the combination of a sick national
economy and disillusion with a political system that is only qualifiedly democratic
and ridden with corruption.  There is even a modest brain drain from Mexico,
not numerically significant, but noteworthy in that Mexico had been a haven for
dissident professionals and intellectuals ever since the Spanish Civil War of the
1930s.

Political Opening 
   Many U.S. observers new to the Mexican scene predict doom.  A familiar
picture is of another Iran on the U.S. doorstep.  However, more serious students
of Mexican affairs usually predict that Mexico will once again muddle through
the hard times without radical political change.  This consensus is based on
the past record and it is reinforced by the ideological differences of the
opposition to the PRI on the left (despite the ability of many of the parties to
the left of the PRI to jointly field a strong presidential candidate for 1988-
1994) and the regionalism that has characterized the right.  The PRI has adroitly
dominated the center in Mexico; the party has forged an ample alliance covering
the spectrum between the two extremes and has dominated largely without
violence or oppression.  William Glade attributes the PRI's durability to its
extensive information network, its appropriation of cherished political symbols
(the "revolution" in particular), and its ability to renew itself constantly.  The
PRI controls the spoils. It can make or break political careers and distribute jobs
to the faithful.  The very existence of much of Mexican industry is due to the
PRI, and so industrialists look to the government, and therefore to the PRI, for
import privileges, tax concessions, and procurement.  It takes a brave and
economically independent industrialist to buck the party. 
   This form of democracy was once familiar in many U.S. states, particularly in
the South, where the Democratic party dominated state and local politics, chose
its candidates in smoke-filled rooms or in rigged primaries from which
inconvenient voters were excluded, and distributed largesse to keep itself in
power. Remnants of such controlled democracy linger in many U.S. states but
they are an anachronism.  The sentiment of many Mexicans as this is written is
that this form of abridged democracy should become an anachronism in Mexico
as well, as demonstrated in Enrique Krauze's 1986 book, Por una democracia sin
adjetivos, which was widely read in Mexico.
   But the consensus opinion that Mexico will muddle its way through with an
essentially unchanged political system came under increasing question in 1986.
The PRI in 1986 drew the wagons in a circle to prevent political opening,
implying a siege mentality new to the Mexican political scene.  In addition,
opposition arose inside the PRI to its closed method of making electoral
decisions.  Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, the son of Lazaro Cardenas and a former
governor of Michoacan, declared for the presidency in 1988 under the banner of
several small parties to protest the closed selection process of the PRI (and to
promote his state-led model of economic development).    The political restlessness has both underlying and proximate causes.  The
immediate causes may be transitory, but the underlying or structural basis for
the anxiety with the political system is less easily rectified.  A structural change
in the way Mexico is governed may be necessary to correct a systemic defect. 
   History, viewed incident by incident, argues that the PRI can make the
marginal modifications necessary to continue.  History viewed not by discrete
incidents but by a tendency that has now covered at least three sexenios (Luis
Echeverria, Jose Lopez Portillo, and Miguel de la Madrid) argues that the past
model of governance has about run its course.  The basis for this statement is
that the stability Mexico enjoyed during the good years is best explained by the
ability of the growing middle class (loosely defined as the fifth through the
ninth family deciles as shown in table 2.4) to meet its aspirations within the
Mexican political and economic system.  It is precisely their inability to meet
these aspirations during the past five to ten years, plus the lack of any
convincing program that will reverse this trend, that is generating the current
restlessness of these groups.  Their impatience is manifested in disgust with
authoritarian practices previously tolerated.   
   The political unease Mexico is experiencing is based on systemic frustration
that was bound to manifest itself under the proper circumstances, circumstances
that presented themselves over three successive administrations, starting with
Echeverria in 1970.  In this atmosphere of general uneasiness, events once
accepted with resignation became rallying cries for opposition.  Two specific
incidents were the mishandling by the authorities of the September 1985
earthquakes and the blatant fraud of the 1986 elections, especially in the state
of Chihuahua.  Each served to arouse the normally passive middle class to anger
with the government.  Mobilization of this anger into effective political
organization has not occurred, not yet, but is forcing changes in PRI positions
and has led to a degree of open criticism of authorities unthinkable a decade
earlier.

                          The September 1985 Earthquakes
   Two large tremors, on September 19 and 20, 1985, caused extensive damage in
Mexico City, including neighborhoods housing middle-class professionals.  This
turned out to be important because it led to independent mobilization of
politically sophisticated persons. 
   Details were widely reported in the domestic and international press and will
not be recounted here. The most comprehensive early analysis of economic
damage was made by the Economic Commission for Latin America and the
Caribbean (Eclac), by its office in Mexico City.  Its first estimate was of 6,000
deaths, 2,000 missing more than a month after the tremors, and 30,000 hurt. 
Housing, hospitals, schools, communication facilities, and other public buildings
suffered major damage and services, such as water, energy, and transportation
were interrupted.  Damage to industrial establishments was modest, save for the
apparel industry, which was concentrated in the part of Mexico City hit by the
earthquake.  Eclac's preliminary estimate of the cost of the direct damage was
$3.6 billion, a substantial figure, but not in itself critical.  It represented about
2 percent of Mexico's GDP and the outlays for restoration did not have to be
made all at once.  In addition, there was financial help from international
sources, from governments, international organizations, and many communities
and persons throughout the United States and elsewhere.
   As bad as the physical and economic damage was, this paled when compared
with the human trauma which beset Mexico City.  The impression left with many
observers (including this author, who visited Mexico City in the aftermath of the
earthquake) was that the authorities failed to grasp the depth of this shock. 
The initial official actions did not pull the city together but instead gave rise to
resentment and recriminations, thereby aggravating the already profound human
shock.  The sense of outrage at the mishandling of the aftermath of the
earthquake had not fully disappeared on its first or second anniversaries (both of
which times this author visited Mexico City); thousands of victims remained
homeless.
   In the immediate aftermath of the earthquake, when private persons organized
themselves to clear the rubble and rescue people buried underneath, soldiers were
despatched mainly to stand guard (over what? rubble?) rather than to help. 
First offers of foreign aid were rejected on the grounds that Mexico had the
wherewithal to deal with the problem by itself.  The impression left with much
of the public was one of brutal indifference, that pride and anti-Americanism
took precedence over human lives.  This criticism showed up in the Mexican
press and led to calls for the dismissal of the foreign secretary, Bernardo
Sepulveda Amor, and the Mexican ambassador in Washington.  Enrique Krauze
was quoted in The Wall Street Journal: "They sacrificed concrete lives for
abstract ideas." 
     The U.S. ambassador, John Gavin, toured the damaged area and gave an
estimate of the deaths of at least 10,000, around triple what the government
estimate then was.  (It is not clear to this day how many deaths there were; the
Eclac estimate remains reasonable.)  He acted in proconsular fashion (as was his
tendency), but his intent was to help.  A good deal of newspaper space and
radio time was taken up with criticizing the ambassador, twisting decent U.S
emotions and giving higher priority to anti-U.S. sentiment than to human
needs.   (The U.S. embassy mobilized a command center to coordinate its help
in providing food, material, and individual experts brought in to help.)
   Three conclusions gained currency in Mexico City in the days after the
earthquake: that private citizens could organize effectively to deal with a crisis,
indeed, more effectively than the authorities; that the government concerned
itself more with form and politics than with substance; and that when the
country needed a leader to pull it together, the president instead acted
bureaucratically.  All these conclusions were discussed openly in the Mexican
media and even more extensively in private conversations.
   Once the immediate, life-threatening emergency was past, the government
compounded its mishandling by maladroitness in expropriating property in the
damaged area, ostensibly to facilitate reconstruction.  Many of the expropriated
buildings had not been damaged and the authorities of the Federal District
backed off after much public and private protest.  Underlying the concern with
the handling of the earthquake was that the government could not be trusted to
handle the reconstruction without corruption playing a role.  This led to
elaborate precautions by foreign governments and institutions when they gave
assistance.  There was a tendency to want to give help in the form of new
buildings, say a schoolhouse, and not with funds to build a schoolhouse. 
   Only belatedly did the government and the PRI realize how bad an impression
had been created in the official handling of the disaster.  The PRI actually then
inserted full-page advertisements in newspapers to argue how much the
government had done.  There was no recovery of full trust, however; the
government had mishandled a tragic incident and the bungling had entered the
public psyche.   There was speculation in the Mexican press as to whether the independent
citizen groups formed to deal with the earthquake could consolidate themselves
and expand as a counterweight to the politiqueria of the authorities.  This did
not manifest itself immediately in a concrete sense, although many middle-class
persons date their activity in politics from that time.  Still, the events following
the earthquake provided a clear indication of the distrust that existed between
the government and a large group of Mexico City's informed citizenry. 
   The earthquake was a tragic event whose human hardships will not soon be
forgotten.  It is not clear whether in the long term it will be seen to have been
a major political event as well.  In any event, its handling added to the
population's other political and economic frustrations with its government. 

                                The 1986 Elections
   The word watershed should not be used lightly, but the gubernatorial and
municipal elections of 1986 merit that characterization because PRI cheating in
the vote count was exposed in the press and this led to anti-PRI demonstrations
and denunciations from both the political right and left.  It is not clear what
the ultimate political fallout will be, but the preexisting structure was shaken at
its very foundation.
   The PRI, over the years, has been consistently losing its share of the total
vote, dropping from 80 to 90 percent during the 1960s to 60 to 70 percent in the
1980s.   A consistent vote of 80 to 90 percent ayes for a single party bespeaks
an authoritarian society; it is too high to be believable.  The acceptance of only
a 60 percent majority implies greater obeisance to the will of the voters.  The
PRI is finding that it must lower the size of its declared electoral majorities if
the announced results are to have any credibility with the public.  The
abstention rate is showing a rising trend, bespeaking an attitude of why bother
to vote when the outcome has already been decided.
    One reason for lower announced majorities is to give the appearance of free
choice and permitting dissenting viewpoints while still maintaining control.  This
was the practical effect of the 1977 and 1986 political reforms.  Each reform
instituted a mixed system for the selection of the legislature.  Of the 400
deputies for the Chamber of Deputies chosen in the 1985 elections, 300 were
selected on a plurality basis from single-member districts and the remaining 100
on a basis of proportional representation from five, multistate electoral districts. 
Any party that won more than 60 plurality seats lost its eligibility to share in
the proportional seats, thus effectively eliminating the PRI from the proportional
seats and reserving them for the minority parties.  In the voting in the single-
member districts in 1985, the PRI received 65 percent of the votes cast.  The
abstentions came to 49 percent.  The other votes were divided as shown in table
2.5.  The actual division of seats in the 1985 congressional elections is shown in
table 2.6.
   One effect of the system introduced in 1977 was to split the opposition vote
among many parties by allocating five seats to each party obtaining 1.5 percent
of the vote.  As table 2.5 shows, this was accomplished by seven parties other
than the PRI in 1985, thereby effectively allocating 35 of the 100 proportional
seats.  This rewarded the small minority parties at the expense of the main
opposition party, the PAN, whose number of seats would have been larger under
a less complex system of proportional representation.  Background on the PAN is
given below.
   The first elections under the 1986 reform were in 1988.  There are now 500
seats in the Chamber of Deputies, 300 from single-member districts and 200
proportional.  The essence of this reform is similar to that of 1977, but now the
opposition is assured of 150 seats, or 30 percent of the total membership; the
opposition share under the 1977 reform was one-fourth of the total.  The new
reform is intended to keep the opposition divided.
   A multiparty system of the type entrenched by the 1977 and 1986 reforms can
be stable when there is one dominant party, as has been the case throughout
Mexico's modern history; or it can be stable when coalitions can form a
majority, something which has not been tested in Mexico. In any case, by
dividing the opposition, the PRI undoubtedly sought to assure that it could stay
in power longer while also giving the multifaceted opposition a cacophonous
voice in a powerless legislature.  But this may also make Mexico ungovernable if
a true democracy, under which votes are counted honestly, ever emerges, because
the large number of political parties with diverse philosophies may make
impossible the formation of effective coalitions.  There are two safeguards
against this outcome, a strong-president system, and a provision in the 1986 law
that the party with the most votes in the single-member elections will be given
an absolute majority of the 500 deputies by allocation from the proportional
seats.  These safeguards will work as long as the PRI remains dominant; but
even then they may fail if the dominance is not overwhelming.
   No Senate elections were held in 1985.  Each state and the federal district in
Mexico is entitled to two senators, 64 in total; before the 1986 reform, all
senators were elected for six-year terms at the same time the president was
chosen for a six-year term.  Starting in 1988, half of the Senate will be renewed
every three years.

                    Table 2.5  Percentages of Votes by Party in
               Single-Member Districts for Chamber of Deputies, 1985

   Party                                                    Percent

   Partido Revolucionario Institucional                      64.8
   Partido Accion Nacional                                   15.6
   Partido Socialista Unificado Mexicano                      3.2
   Partido Democrata Mexicano                                 2.7
   Partido Socialista de los Trabajadores                     2.5
   Partido Popular Socialista                                 2.0
   Partido Autentico de la Revolucion Mexicana                1.7
   Partido Mexicano de los Trabajadores                       1.5
   Partido Revolucionario de los Trabajadores                 1.3
   Annulled                                                   4.7 
        Voting                                              100.0 

        Abstentions                                          49.3

   Source:   John J. Bailey, Governing Mexico 1976-1988:  The
             Statecraft of Crisis Management, Chapter 7, based on
             data from the Comision Federal Electoral.
   


             Table 2.6  Congressional Representation, 1985

Party1                             Seats
                         Single-member  Proportional

PRI                            289           -
PAN                             9            32
PSUM                                         12
PDM                                          12
PST                                          12
PPS                                          11
PARM                            2             9
PMT                                           6
PRT                                           6
                                                
          Totals               300          100


Source:   See table 2.5

1See Table 2.5 for full names of parties.   Only a few comments will be made here on the nature of the opposition
parties.  The most important, and the one whose strength has usually been
most disturbing to the PRI, is the PAN.  (The following discussion will use
acronyms to identify the parties.  Their full names are given in table 2.5.)  The
PAN was established originally by intellectuals and professionals with more of a
religious outlook than existed in the official party.  Its purpose was to form a
counter to the ideas and policies of the Cardenas administration.  Today the
party's principles include greater separation of powers, more local control as
opposed to the centralization of power that now exists, a smaller role for the
government in the economy and a larger role for the private sector.
   The party has had a stormy history ever since the 1970s, shifting between
confrontational opposition to the PRI and competition as the loyal opposition. 
This division within the party was so great in 1976 that the PAN was unable to
nominate a candidate to oppose Lopez Portillo, but since 1978, and especially
since 1982, the party's opposition to PRI has been confrontational.  Its 1988
presidential candidate, a wealthy businessman named Manuel Clouthier, is known
for his confrontational personality.  The wing of the party that supports
Clouthier's style is known as the neopanistas.   The PAN gained strength during
the difficult years, dating from the Echeverria administration.  Echeverria's anti-
business tone and Lopez Portillo's nationalization of the banks encouraged many
in business to support the PAN.
   The PAN's greatest electoral strength comes from urban manufacturing areas; 
regionally, it has been strongest in northern Mexico.  Many PAN critics argue
that it is not a viable opposition party because its base is limited both
geographically and popularly.  This may be true, although overstated; in anyevent, regional successes could spawn offspring in other areas, which is precisely
what the PRI feared in 1986.  
   The most important party on the left in 1985 was the PSUM, which was an
alliance formed in 1981 among the Communist and other small parties.  Other
parties on the left in 1985 included the PPS, the PMT, and the PRT.  As can be
seen from table 2.5, all four parties together totaled less than 9 percent of the
vote in the 1985 elections for deputies from single-member districts.  The PAN
alone showed  15 percent of the vote total.  
   The left was more united for the 1988 elections, but not fully of one mind. 
Five parties joined together in 1987 to form the Partido Mexicano Socialista
(PMS).  These included the PSUM and the PMT (shown in tables 2.5 and 2.6),
plus three smaller parties.  The PMS nominated Heberto Castillo, the head of the
PMT, as its candidate for president in 1988, but the more formidable 1988
candidate to the left of the PRI was Cuauhtemoc Cardenas, much of whose
strength was based on reflected prestige from his father Lazaro.  Cardenas, a
former stalwart of the PRI, ran for president under the aegis of three small
parties, the PARM, PPS, and PST, which for campaign purposes referred to
themselves as the National Democratic Front (Frente Democratico Nacional --
FDN).  All three parties have had close ties to the PRI in the past.  Cardenas,
and the group that split from the PRI with him, advocate a return to state-led
economic development.  His speeches focused on the need for more economic
equality in Mexico, and he favored a moratorium on servicing the country's
external debt in order to restore economic growth.  Cardenas had great appeal
among the ejidatarios, who remembered his father, and among persons who
dislike the PRI but are unwilling to support a party as conservative as the PAN. 
Cardenas' dominance on the left was so clear that Castillo withdrew from the
race one month before the election and threw his support to Cardenas.
   As a matter of record, the percentages recorded for the candidates in the
July 1988 presidential election were:  Salinas     ; Clouthier     ; Cardenas    
; and the two minor candidates together       .
   There was some promise early in the de la Madrid administration that the PRI
would respect electoral outcomes in local elections.  The opposition won seven
major cities, including five state capitals, in these elections in 1982 and 1983. 
PAN victories came in northern and central states -- Hermosillo, Durango,
Chihuahua, Guanajuato, and San Luis Potosi.  The string of victories was halted
in September 1983 in Baja California Norte, when the PRI won the governorship
amid claims of fraud.  The electoral calendar was full in 1985, when seven state
governors were chosen as well as the full 400 deputies.  The PRI continued its
clean sweep of gubernatorial elections, unbroken since the predecessor to the
party was formed in 1929, but there were documented claims of fraud, especially
in Sonora and Nuevo Leon.  In her discussion of the 1985 elections, specifically
those for the Chamber of Deputies, M. Delal Baer wrote: 
One might speculate that although the events of July did not produce
an electoral watershed, they did precipitate a perceptual watershed in
public awareness of the gap between political myth and reality.  The
inconsistencies generated by the political reform have accentuated
public awareness of a gap between promise and reality.
   There were 12 gubernatorial elections in 1986, but none more visible and more
sensitive than that in Chihuahua on July 6, which also held municipal elections
the same day.  Chihuahua, a border state, was known as a center of opposition. 
The border as a whole poses a difficult conundrum for the PRI.  It is distant
from the highly centralized government in Mexico City, increasingly linked with
the United States for its well being, and growing in population, all
characteristics Chihuahua typifies.  The PAN had won mayoral elections in the
state's seven largest cities in 1983 and had won half of the state's congressional
seats in the 1985 elections.  Two leftist parties, the PSUM and the PST had
each won a mayoral election in 1983 and, as M. Delal Baer noted, the opposition
at the local level governed an estimated 70 to 80 percent of the state's
population. 
   The PRI chose attractive candidates in Chihuahua, especially for governor. 
Fernando Baeza Melendez, 45, was a conservative with many ties in the state's
business community and, indeed, his family was close to the PAN.  The former
mayor of the Chihuahua city of Delicias and a congressmen from the state, his
campaign recognized the estrangement of the state from the capital and, indeed,
he ran against Mexico City.  A good indication of Baeza's conservative
philosophic outlook was captured in a remark made by the director of the PSUM
in Chihuahua after Baeza's inauguration as governor and his selection of
advisors:  "If Francisco Barrio (the PAN candidate) were governor, there would
certainly be more priistas (stalwarts of the PRI) in his cabinet."
   Francisco Barrio Terrazas was the flamboyent PAN candidate for governor. 
Barrio had been elected mayor of Ciudad Juarez in 1983, at the time when the
PRI seemed to be respecting electoral outcomes in local elections.  His affiliation
is with the neopanista group of the PAN and, as did Baeza, Barrio conducted a
vigorous campaign.
   Two attractive candidates locked in a fiery campaign, the recent track record
of PAN victories in the state, and an influx of newspersons from Mexico, the
United States, and elsewhere -- made this a particularly noteworthy electoral
race.  In the end, the PRI under Baeza was declared the lopsided winner, 401,167
to 231,109.  PRI candidates were also declared winners in all but two
municipalities, Nuevo Casas Grandes (to PAN) and Gomez Farias (PPS).  Hardly
anybody gave credence to the legitimacy of the results.
   The PRI had been clumsy; because there were so many witnesses, the evidence
of widespread fraud was evident.  The fraud took many forms: full voting boxes
when the polls opened; denial of entry to opposition party poll watchers;
intimidation; carousel or repeat voting by individuals; the transport of ballot
boxes by unauthorized persons; deliberate delays in voting places; and
registrations in some municipalities exceeding the recorded populations.  The
actuality of fraud was documented in an article published in March 1987 in the
Mexico City magazine Nexos.  In another article on the fraud in Chihuahua,
Franciso Ortiz Pinchetti wrote: "The most complete, expensive, and sophisticated
operation in the history of the official party was mounted in Chihuahua to carry
out a decision of the federal government not to hand over this northern entity
to the opposition, cost whatever it cost."
   The events which followed this fraud were unprecedented in modern Mexican
history.  Repeated mass protests took place.  Bridges were blocked between
Mexico and the United States, especially between Ciudad Juarez and El Paso.
Catholic bishops strongly denounced the arrogance of the public forces and
planned to withhold mass, an action prevented only by the intervention of the
Secretary of Gobernacion (Interior), Manuel Bartlett Diaz, with the papal nuncio
in Mexico.  The press and journals were full of advertisements, including one
from the Chihuahua bishops, denouncing the fraud and the lack of democracy
that was demonstrated in Chihuahua.  Local business leaders demanded that the
elections be nullified.  Three prominent Chihuahuenses (Luis H. Alvarez, ex-
mayor of Chihuahua city and later president of the PAN, Francisco Villarreal, a
businessman, and Dr. Victor M. Oropeza) went on an extended hunger strike. 
   More significantly, the opposition of both the left and right joined together
in the name of democracy to denounce the PRI.  Brought together by PMT
president Heberto Castillo, the PAN, PSUM, PMT, and PRT formed the
Movimiento Nacional Democratico to protest the fraud in the elections in
Chihuahua and in August state elections in Oaxaca and Durango as well, and to
call for electoral reform.  This unified protest by parties as disparate as the
PAN and the other three must be considered an event of some importance in
Mexico. 
   Of equal importance, since political parties are often seen as taking actions
as much out of convenience as conviction, was an open letter of protest, dated
July 23, from 21 intellectuals to Baeza, demanding that the election be annulled.
Few Mexican intellectuals are pro-PAN.  While there was a large disaffection of
intellectuals from the PRI following the handling of the 1968 student
demonstrations, most intellectuals depend on the PRI for jobs.   It thus took
some courage to protest to the PRI.  This form of courage, of open
disagreements of intellectuals with the PRI, has since become more frequent.
   The PRI now controls the governorship and most municipalities in Chihuahua,
but at the cost of increased public disillusion with Mexican "democracy."  This
has become evident in the growing open criticism of the electoral process in
Mexico.  The importance of the 1986 Chihuahua elections is that they marked a
dramatic nadir in public support of the PRI, and this is stimulating introspection
in the party about how to adapt to the clear desire for effective suffrage while
still maintaining political control.
   Elections in other states did not attract the attention of that in Chihuahua. 
The combination of circumstances -- two attractive candidates, the history of
opposition success, the proximity to the United States -- was not the same
elsewhere.  However, the outcomes were similar.  The PRI continued to sweep
gubernatorial elections.  Indeed, the PRI has been putting up strong candidates;
an active and potentially strong opposition has at least had this positive effect. 
Abstentions continue to grow.  Proceso asserted that the abstention rate in the
elections in Oaxaca on August 3, 1986, was 80 percent and that only 10 percent
of the electorate supported the PRI.   No documentation was provided to
substantiate this large abstention rate, but there is enough evidence that the
electorate is losing interest in elections run and counted in the style that the
PRI prefers. 

Economic Opening and Political Closing
   The double development in Mexico -- opening the economy while battening
down the political hatches -- is certain to have lasting effects, and the two
developments are best viewed simultaneously since they interact. 
   The economic opening was forced on Mexico by a combination of internal and
external circumstances that made evident the obsolescence of the model in use
since the end of World War II.  If carried to its logical conclusion, the market
rather than the state will become the prime determinant of decisions, and the
resulting decline in the party's ability to offer special, official favors will alter
its role.  The Mexican nationalistic tradition of looking inward will become more
nuanced if Mexico's well-being becomes increasingly dependent on external
markets, and an opening will deepen economic interaction with the United States
beyond what already exists. 
   Because the consequences of this policy are far reaching, it is appropriate to
ask whether economic opening is durable.  A corollary question is:  what are the
options?  The answer that jumps immediately to mind to the second question is a
return to a state-led model, intensifying  state regulation and favoritism to
domestic firms.  This would require negating not only the internal decisions made
by the de la Madrid administration, but shifting position on a series of
international undertakings in the GATT, the IMF, and the World Bank.  An
increase in oil prices might provide the financial means to make such a policy
direction at least temporarily viable, and there are strong forces in Mexico who
prefer exactly such a policy reversal.  The corriente democratica (democratic
current) within the PRI which led to the presidential candidacy of Cuauhtemoc
Cardenas when the party rejected the group's demand for a greater say in
choosing the PRI's presidential candidate, is one manifestation of thee desire to
shift economic policy to a state-led orientation.
   Much behind-the-scenes quarreling goes on between PRI operatives and
technicians.  The latter have been in the ascendancy for at least 20 years and
dominated the de la Madrid cabinet --  de la Madrid himself comes from a
technical and not a party background.  The PRI's choice of the successor to de
la Madrid, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, the former Secretary of Budget and
Planning (SPP), indicated the continued ascendancy of the technicians; Salinas
had no political experience other than appointment as a cabinet secretary before
he was elected president.  There is no ideological uniformity among either
politicians or technicians -- and both skills may be combined in the same person
-- but the natural tendencies of persons with the different formations  are
dissimilar.  Politicians are less likely to be supporters of austerity than are
technicians.
   Two diametrically opposed political arguments are being made in Mexico.  The
first is that a time of basic economic change is precisely the wrong moment for
political opening.  One argument states that the populism that goes with the
latter will preclude the success of the former.  This is a common position in
Mexico, and it is this argument that prompted the statement by Enrique Krauze
quoted at the head of this chapter.  The politician's argument for delaying
political opening is more straightforward: it would be electoral suicide to open
the political system at a time of economic hardship.
   It is obviously possible to combine economic opening and political closure, at
least for a time, as is evident in South Korea, Taiwan, and countries in
Southeast Asia.  Is it possible in Mexico, which has a different tradition from
the countries named?  The conclusion here is that political closure in Mexico
will fail, sooner rather than later; and that the demand for political opening will
be stimulated by the economic opening.  This logic may lead not to political
opening but to economic closure, to a reversion to a past policy that has a slim
chance for future success.
    Scholarly analysis of Mexico tends to concentrate on either the economic or
the political structure.  There is a large literature dealing with the dispute
between those who favor an open Mexican economy and those who support one
that is closed; and between the relative economic weights to be given to the
public sector as opposed to the private enterprise in Mexico's version of a mixed
economy.  There is a mostly separate literature on the qualified nature of
Mexico's democracy, well exemplified by Enrique Krauze's Por una democracia sin
adjetivos.  The two strands have come together, as indeed they must, in the
uncertain atmosphere of economic stagnation and political manipulation.  It is
doubtful that they can be ripped asunder any more. 
   Mexico's transition from a peripheral developing country to an intermediate
economic power -- which is the stated goal of the country's leaders -- required
the nation's insertion into the international economy.  This is now taking place. 
Political opening, in my judgment, will also come, regardless of the outcome of
the economic restructuring -- but it will become irresistible as Mexico's
integration into the world economy deepens.  Political opening can be disruptive,
but the suppression of opening is apt to be even more disorderly.  The failure to
open the political system will also destroy Mexico's ability to play a major moral
role internationally -- to which Mexico has long aspired.
   Economic success in Mexico would benefit the United States -- in increased
exports and investment opportunities, and by reducing emigration pressures.  A
prosperous Mexico would become increasingly integrated economically with the
United States.  But the U.S. objective is twofold -- economic prosperity coupled
with political stability -- and it is the combinatin that is crucial.  In my view,
anything less than a double opening, political and economic, will fail, and in the
process frustrate an optimally beneficial bilateral relationship.Notes
