







                                     CHAPTER 7

                        The Economics and Politics of Debt


   Sooner or later, regulators will have to accept some form of
explicit interest capitalization.  Ernesto Zedillo Ponce de Leon, 1986.

   Only if interest rates are substantially reduced and/or there are
drastic international changes, will Mexico be able to service its debt
in the long term.  Guillermo Ortiz and Jaime Serra Puche, 1986.

   Ideas which were discarded as radical or unacceptable when initially
raised become, often after a very short time, generally acceptable
techniques for concrete solutions [to the debt problem].  Francisco
Davila Suarez, 1986.



Unbearable Burden Vs. Concrete Obligation
   Mexico's external debt exceeds $105 billion and the country runs neck and
neck with Brazil as the largest debtor among developing nations.  Annual
interest payments on the public debt vary year by year, depending on interest
rates in the United States and other capital markets, but is running $8 billion a
year, about 5 percent of GDP.  Debt principal is not being repaid; reschedulings
have pushed these obligations into the future.  The pattern has been to borrow,
thereby increasing the total  outstanding debt, at the same time that current
interest payments are made.  There has been no explicit capitalization of interest
obligations to foreign banks, a step which commercial creditors have resisted, but
in effect that is what has been happening since even as current interest is paid,
the total of borrowed capital increases.  This implicit form of interest
capitalization (that is, converting an obligation to pay interest into part of the
principal) suits the regulatory and accounting practices of U.S. commercial banks.
   The immediate issue is economic -- funds that leave Mexico to meet interest
obligations are a drain of resources desperately needed at home.  The economic
cost when interest payments exceed new capital inflows is particularly onerous
for a developing country such as Mexico, and meeting the external debt
obligation has been a major contributing factor to the decline in Mexico's
economy since 1982.  In essence, the interest burden of the external debt is
being transferred back to Mexico's workers who have suffered sharp declines in
real income.
   The combination of economic decline and social hardship, coupled with the
visibility of payments to foreign banks, has made the debt situation one of
Mexico's leading political issues.  Mexicans see themselves suffering while
creditors prosper.  The sentiment for paying less interest, or paying none at all
for now, is powerful.  Stating the problem in moral terms, of who suffers most,
is unlikely to stir the souls of creditors, but the social-political aspect of the
problem should agitate the U.S. government.  
   The Mexican government, judging the burden of payment to be less costly
than the economic cost of default, has continued to make payments, but has
renegotiated the level of these payments on increasingly favorable terms. This is
not, however, a calculation made once and forever; it is subject to repeated
evaluations entailing a complex of factors, including the amount of payments,
both in absolute terms and in relation to other economic variables in Mexico, the
relationship between payments and new capital inflows, and the degree of
pressure on the Mexican authorities from the internal political situation.
   The calculus that Mexico must make, and then continually remake, is thus a
mixture of the economic costs and benefits of meeting or suspending foreign
interest payments, the domestic political cost of payments versus the short-term
political benefits of suspending them, and the effect of non-payment on Mexico's
international prestige.  The decision to keep paying has required some
concessions from the creditors.  If the decision were made to cease payments, it,
too, would probably be accompanied by a negotiation; Mexico would concede that
the obligation exists, but seek relief.  
   Creditors must make their own complex calculations.  The U.S. government
has a stake in Mexico's political stability, but it also is concerned with the
operations of the international financial system.  Private creditors in developed
countries have short-term profit motives and, for the larger banks, systemic
concerns as well.  Official and private concerns in creditor countries then are
not necessarily the same and large private creditors have a different outlook
from smaller creditors.  Making interest payments to foreign banks means that
those funds cannot be used to buy imports; thus, the U.S. productive sector pays
a price in reduced exports so that U.S. banks can be paid.
   The overall international debt situation, which includes Mexico's debt, is
changing rapidly.  This chapter will outline the evolution of Mexico's external
debt, its effects in Mexico, and then, in the light of U.S.-Mexican relations,
conclude with a recommendation.      

Evolution of the Debt
   The "normal" pattern of debt distribution taught to economics students two
decades ago was that developing countries should be expected to run deficits in
the current account of their balance of payments, that is, import more goods and
services than they export.  The current-account deficit would then be covered by
capital inflows, made up of private investments, foreign grants, and credit from
official sources and private lenders.  The net result of such a balance-of-
payments structure would be to allow developing countries to absorb resources
from the rest of the world for use in their development programs.  In other
words, it was unexceptional for economic development to be driven partly by
contracting external debt, and this was certainly the pattern for Mexico.  The
current account was generally negative, modestly so until the 1980s when the
deficit skyrocketed until corrective action was taken.  The balance-of-payments
data for the 1980s are shown in table 4.9.
   The generally accepted pattern that developed countries were exporters of
capital and developing countries importers was shattered by the oil shocks of
1973-1974 and 1980-1981 and related events that went under the name of
recycling petrodollars (that is, the surpluses built up by oil-exporting countries). 
The shifts in trade patterns were drastic as the result of the large oil price
increases.  What is particularly germane to understanding what took place in
Mexico is that the current-account surpluses of the oil exporters (Mexico was
not a major oil exporter in 1973; that came a few years later) found their way
into banks which acted as intermediaries and lent out the funds.  This recycling
by private institutions was encouraged by governments and even international
financial institutions such as the World Bank and the International Monetary
Fund because it was evident that official lending would be insufficient to cover
the capital needs of developing countries.  In retrospect, the encouragement to
borrow laid the seeds of later trouble for those countries that heeded the siren
call of available, loanable funds.  The official encouragement should not bear all
the blame, however; if the banks were eager lenders, countries like Mexico
turned out to be willing borrowers.  If sovereignty means self-determination,
then Mexico bears the responsibility for its own decision to borrow.  Placing
blame, however, is  no longer really relevant.
   The traditional pattern under which developed countries were expected to be
capital exporters and developing countries capital importers was finally shattered
by two further developments.  The first was the steady growth of U.S. current-
account deficits.  By 1986, the United States was not only the world's largest
capital importer, but also the world's largest international debtor.  It is hard to
overstress the impact on Mexico and other countries of this radical and rapid
shift of the United States from the world's leading creditor to its largest debtor
nation, and it is a prime example of the effect domestic U.S. policy inadvertently
has on Mexico.  The shift raised U.S. interest rates, which in turn raised
Mexico's debt payments.
   Another reason for the change in pattern of resource flows was the existence
of the debt itself.  Debt must be serviced.  Interest must be paid even if
principal is not amortized, and this can be done without a further debt buildup
only if the country has a surplus in current account.  The turnaround in the
Mexican current account began in 1982, when the deficit was reduced.  The shift
in Mexico's current-account position between 1981 and 1983 was $18 billion,
which is a gigantic number for an economy the size of Mexico's.  But the
cutback in merchandise imports that was required to create this shift was severe
and unsustainable and the current-account surplus declined in 1984 and 1985,
then shifted back into modest deficit in 1986.  A current-account surplus was
restored in 1987.
   That is the broad context in which Mexico's external debt grew, but it is
equally important to look at internal explanations.  Let's start with the debt
buildup itself.  Table 7.1 shows the growth of external debt from 1971 through
1985.  Table 7.2 provides a picture of annual debt flows, that is the inflow
leading to the buildup of debt and the outflow for interest payments.  Table 7.3
profiles Mexico's foreign debt by type of creditor from 1982 through 1985.
Together the tables present a picture of the evolution of the debt buildup.
   From 1971 to 1985, the debt buildup was persistent, but there were spurts in
its rate of growth (Table 7.1).  The rate of buildup of external debt increased in
1973, levelled off somewhat after 1977 (following an agreement with the IMF
calling for a limitation in the rate of increase of foreign debt), and then took
an immense spurt in 1981.  Another IMF agreement in 1982 again levelled off the
rate of debt increase.  These agreements with the IMF were entered into both
because new capital was needed, and because some external disciplinary pressure
was useful.  
   Ortiz and Serra Puche have pointed out that the average annual rate of
external debt increase between 1960 and 1972 was 6.3 percent, or less than the
increase in GDP.  The receipt side of the current account in the balance of
payments increased at the even more rapid rate of 10.4 percent a year.  The
implication is that Mexico's external borrowings were prudent over this period. 
To revert to the traditional model set forth earlier, while Mexico's current-
account deficit was growing larger (at an average annual rate of 8.3 percent
over this period), this reflected the absorption of resources from the rest of the
world at what appeared to be a sustainable rate. Over this whole period, the
debt/GDP ratio was well below 20 percent, but by 1985, it was more than 50
percent.  It is now more than 60 percent.

                   Table 7.1  Mexico's External Debt, 1971-1985
                          (Values in billions of dollars)

                                                       Public as
             Year        Total     Public    Private   percent total

             1971          6.6       4.5       2.1      68.7
             1972          7.7       5.1       2.6      65.8
             1973         10.3       7.1       3.2      69.0
             1974         14.5      10.0       4.5      68.7
             1975         20.1      14.5       5.6      71.9
             1976         25.9      19.6       6.3      75.7
             1977         29.3      22.9       6.4      78.1
             1978         33.4      26.3       7.1      78.6
             1979         40.3      29.8      10.5      73.9
             1980         50.7      33.8      16.9      66.6
             1981         74.9      53.0      21.9      70.7
             1982         84.9      58.9      26.0      69.4
             1983         92.6      73.5      19.1      79.4
             1984         94.2      75.7      18.5      80.4
             1985         94.4      75.9      18.5      80.4

Sources:  Roberto Gutierrez R., "El endeudamiento externo del
          sector privado de Mexico:  Expansion y renegociacion,"
          p. 338. 

Note:  External debt figures will vary depending on how short-term
        debt is calculated and how much private debt is captured.
                       Table 7.2  Net Flows of External Debt
                          (Values in billions of dollars)

                                                     Interest as
                        Inflows as      Interest  percent merchandise
Year      Inflows       percent GDP     payments       exports

1973-76     4.8            5.1            1.2           41.1
1977        3.3            3.5            2.0           42.5
1978        3.0            2.5            2.6           42.4
1979        6.7            2.6            3.7           42.1
1980       10.5            2.5            5.5           36.2
1981       23.3            9.7            8.3           43.2
1982       10.1            3.1           11.3           51.8
1983        3.5            2.5            9.9           46.1


Source:  Leopoldo Solis and Ernesto Zedillo, "The Foreign Debt of
         Mexico," p. 262.
   

              Table 7.3  Profile of Mexico's Foreign Debt, 1982-1985
                               (Billions of dollars)

                                           1982      1983      1984      1985

          A.  Public sector                60.0      69.5      73.2      73.5

          By type of creditor:
               Commercial banks            46.4      54.1      56.9      57.4
               IBRD and IDB1                5.0       4.4       4.9       5.1
               IMF                          0.2       1.2       2.4       2.4
               Other                        8.4       9.8       9.0       8.6

          B.  Mexican banks                 8.4       5.1       5.0       5.0

          C.  Private sector               19.1      19.1      18.5      18.5

          TOTAL                            87.6      93.8      96.7      97.0

          Percent public sector debt by type of creditor:
               Commercial banks            77.3      77.8      77.7      78.1
               IBRD and IDB                 8.3       6.3       6.7       6.9
               IMF                          0.3       1.7       3.3       3.3
               Other                       14.0      14.1      12.3      11.7


          Source:  U.S. Embassy, Mexico City

          Figures may not add due to rounding.

          Note:  The debt figures are not the same as those of Table 7.1 because
           the two sources did not use identical definitions of debt.  The
           differences are not significant for purposes of this analysis.

          1International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (the World Bank)
           and the Inter-American Development Bank.
                                                       

   The slowdowns and spurts in the accumulation of external debt can be seen in
table 7.2.  The growth in debt buildup slowed perceptibly in 1977, then increased
again markedly in 198l, only to slow down again after the IMF agreement in
1982.  Table 7.2 also shows the relationship between capital inflows from new
debt and payments to meet interest on old debt.  The inflows exceeded the
interest payments until 198l, the normal pattern if the objective is to exploit
resources made available by the rest of the world.  After 1982, the relationship
was reversed and Mexico was providing resources to the rest of the world, a
topsy-turvy situation in which the poor country, Mexico, is exporting resources,
while the rich, neighboring country, the United States, is importing resources.  
   Table 7.3 shows that bank and other commercial credit make up the majority
of Mexico's external debt.  The significance of the dominance of commercial-
bank credit is twofold: such lending is usually shorter term than credit from
official sources, such as the World Bank and the Inter-American Development
Bank; and it normally carries a higher interest rate.  Commercial-bank credit
has another particularly relevant feature, it is commercial.  The behavior of
commercial banks is motivated primarily by profit considerations; a Mexican
appeal to commercial lenders to take into account political and social
considerations by giving generous debt treatment has less resonance than when a
comparable plea is made to governments or international institutions. 
                                Why Mexico Borrowed
   The motivation of the commercial bank lenders is reasonably straightforward. 
They had loanable funds, primarily from the capture of petrodollars, and
sovereign borrowers like Mexico, or near sovereigns like large public enterprises
such as Pemex, seemed safe clients from whom attractive interest-rate spreads
could be obtained over the cost of the money to the banks.  In other words, the
lending was profitable at what seemed to be a low risk.  What is less fathomable
is why the banks continued to lend even after it became evident that the low-
risk assumption was shaky."  Some possible explanations include:  ignorance of
the size of Mexico's debt; inertia; and the conviction popular in the early 1980s
that the debt problem was one of liquidity, that is, a short-term phenomenon
that would pass, rather than a structural issue that would endure.
   Mexico's continued large borrowings were no more justifiable than the
continued bank lending.  But the 1970s and early 1980s were heady years in
Mexico, as the country became an oil exporter of the first rank at a time when
oil prices were high.  For two years, 1980 and 1981, real growth of the GDP, at
8.3 and 7.9 percent, was well above the historical norm for Mexico, and together
with the accompanying increase in job creation, this was hailed in Mexico's
global plan of the time as a major accomplishment, with the implication that a
new growth norm had been established. 
   The implicit assumption was that either oil prices would remain high or that
borrowing based on oil in the ground could be covered in due course even if
prices declined temporarily.  Meanwhile, oil revenues and loans could be used to
create by the twenty-first century an industrial and agricultural structure that
would ensure self-sustained economic growth even if oil revenue declined.  As a
result of such bullish thinking, Mexico's external debt increased even when oil
prices were high, then skyrocketed when oil prices declined.
   Solis and Zedillo undertook a detailed exercise to decompose the sources of
the growth in external debt, which they attribute to the spendthrift atmosphere
in Mexico at the time, typified by the popularity of those members of the
cabinet who produced the grandest projects and programs.  Their results show
that the major external causes of the growth of the foreign debt were shocks of
two varieties -- high oil prices, which slowed the growth in volume of exports,
thereby causing oil revenue to be insufficient to meet the growing cost of
imports; then the later decline in the oil price in 1981, and the sharp increase in
world interest rates.  They cite the unprecedented increase in imports of foreign
goods and capital flight as the main internal causes for the debt increase.  The
growth in imports resulted from the development plan and an overvalued
exchange rate.  The latter also stimulated the large capital flight by making it
possible to purchase foreign exchange at a low cost in pesos, then profit when
the peso later was devalued.  
   There is a large literature on why countries borrow.  Gersovitz gives four
reasons: to divorce the level of consumption from short-term income fluctuations;
because the domestic marginal product of capital exceeds the world cost of
capital (in layman's language, because the extra output from the activity for
which the loan is used exceeds the cost of the loan); because a country wishes
to adjust slowly to some shock; and to have liquidity to carry out international
transactions, such as suppliers' credits for trade.  But these explanations are
inadequate to explain the Mexican actions.  There is little evidence that Mexico
was meticulous in carrying out cost-benefit analyses on the use of foreign funds
for specific projects and the country's external debt policy eventually led to
shock treatment in the de la Madrid administration to stabilize the economy; the
adjustment was sudden, not gradual, and as the situation deteriorated, it became
increasingly difficult to obtain short-term loans at an acceptable cost.
   What is apparent is that purely economic explanations of why Mexico
contracted external debt are incomplete.  A broader political-economic
explanation involving the desire to distribute economic largesse for political
motives, the social goal of augmenting job creation, and the nationalistic impulse
of a rush to industrialization all helped fuel the rush to debt.
   Policy during the critical years of debt buildup was made in reckless disregard
of the costs of faulty judgment.  Mexico counted on continued high oil prices,
and assumed that oil in the ground would cover all repayment contingencies. 
Murphy's law was not taken into account, and when oil prices declined, capital
flight surged, and foreign interest rates increased, the consequences were
devastating.  This inexcusable recklessness constituted an abuse of leadership
that adversely affected the lives of 80 million Mexicans.  
   As table 7.1 shows, the debt buildup also affected Mexico's private sector. 
Indeed, during the critical years of buildup of foreign debt between 1980 and
1982, the private debt grew at a more rapid rate than the public, and for
reasons similar to the growth of public debt, namely, the heady atmosphere of
perpetual economic growth based on petroleum.  At the end of 1983, the private
external debt was distributed among 3,873 companies, but one-third of the total
was concentrated in nine industrial groups.  The most important creditors were
U.S. banks.
   The conditions which led to the public-sector debt crisis in 1982 also brought
on a crisis of the private debtors.  The expectation of continued 8 percent or so
growth a year turned into economic decline; this led to a sharp drop in domestic
demand; new construction contracts plummeted, especially from Pemex; and the
sharp devaluation of the currency increased the peso cost of debt repayment. 
But while Mexico's private sector was no more prescient in its business forecasts
than the public sector was in its economic projections, private individuals had
the option to invest outside of Mexico to protect the value of their capital and
could turn to the government for rescue.  This was done by an agency which
began operations at the beginning of 1983, best known by its initials, Ficorca
(Fideicomiso para la Cobertura de Riesgos Cambiarios), which protected private
companies against the risk of further devaluations of the peso.  The operations
of Ficorca are complex and the extent of the assistance given depended on the
rescheduling terms the private company could negotiate with its creditors.  What
the establishment of Ficorca demonstrated was that when large companies were
in peril of bankruptcy because of the inability to meet foreign-exchange
obligations, the government felt constrained to help.  There was thus a merging
of the public and private external debts.  Government rescues of large
corporations are familiar in the United States as well, as in the Chrysler and
Continental Illinois cases.
   One other major factor in Mexico's debt buildup was capital flight, which
embodies a contradiction.  For while the growth of public and private debt was
at least partly due to the expectation of continued economic growth, capital
flight takes place when there is lack of private confidence in the political or
economic stability of a country.  Even in 1981, when capital inflows (that is,
new debt) amounted to about $23 billion, capital flight was apparently about $11
billion.  There are several elements in the reconciliation of these contradictory
tendencies: companies may borrow to expand, even as individuals, both within
and outside these companies, send funds abroad to protect their capital; and the
very size of the capital outflows created a need to replace the foreign exchange.
   Capital flight is not a precise concept.  The word "flight" gives it a
pejorative meaning, but much movement of capital out of a country is for
legitimate investment and trade purposes and it is not simple to separate this
necessary movement from precautionary shipment of assets abroad.
   Estimates of capital flight from Mexico in recent years vary with the
definition used, but for the last decade as a whole capital flight was equal to
one-third to one-half of the increment to foreign debt.  The implication is
that if capital had not fled Mexico, the foreign debt buildup would have been
substantially lower, but this is an uncertain assertion since the accumulation of
debt was not necessarily all used for productive purposes to compensate for
capital flight.  However, capital available for use in the country certainly would
have been greater had there been less capital flight. 
   There is constant speculation among financial experts whether accumulated
capital flight, which represents assets held abroad by Mexicans, can be lured
back by appropriate policies.  Some return of capital to Mexico did occur in 1986
and 1987, but it was motivated by the need for working capital in the face of
tight credit policy as well as by high Mexican interest rates.  Much of the
capital sent abroad was invested in fixed assets, such as real estate, and this
will not return to Mexico.
   One feature of capital flight from Mexico not well developed in the technical
economic literature is the proximity of the United States.  Deposits by Mexicans
in banks on the U.S. side of the border flourished in recent years, particularly
after 1982,  even in those border areas which had troubled economies and high
unemployment, such as the lower Rio Grande Valley and Laredo. An analyst with
the Federal Reserve Bank in Dallas estimated that in 1984 banks in Texas border
counties held one-fourth of all Mexican deposits in the United States.  The
proportion is remarkably high since the U.S. border banks are relatively small. 
The reasons are familiarity, what the analyst in the cited article called "an old-
boy network," and higher liquidity (that is, a low ratio of loans to deposits) than
banks generally in the United States.  This assures Mexican depositors that they
can have quick access to their funds without breaking the banks.
   The question of capital flight merits examination in the context of the
Mexican debt problem because the amounts, however calculated, are extremely
large and the issue arouses so much passion in both capital-fleeing and capital-
recipient countries.  The emotion in Mexico often centers on patriotism.  The
contrary view in U.S. financial circles is that a wealth holder would be a fool to
needlessly risk his assets by keeping them at home if objective circumstances
indicated a need to send them elsewhere.  There are charges from time to time
that U.S. banks and other recipients of capital flight actually solicit these funds,
but the solicitation would fall on deaf ears if the "frightened money" did not
exist.
   Countries have resorted to controls to prevent capital flight, as Mexico did
for a short time in late 1982, but the accepted wisdom is that these can have
little long-term effect in Mexico because of its proximity to and extensive
economic linkages with the United States.  Controls on outward movement of
capital would almost certainly impede the flow of capital into Mexico since asset
holders do not wish to be trapped in a cul de sac with no legal means of exit.

                    The World Won't Stop - It's Hard to Get Off
    There is plenty of blame to share between borrowers and lenders for the
problem Mexico faces in servicing its foreign debt, but blame-casting is a useful
exercise only if it serves as a caution to avoid repetition of faulty policies.  
   Once the large banks became heavily exposed in Mexico, they had no graceful
exit.  When the debt crisis exploded on the international scene in the latter part
of 1982, many large U.S. commercial banks were heavily exposed in Mexico; that
is, loans to Mexico constituted a high proportion of their capital.  These
proportions have since been reduced, but large banks still cannot easily walk
away from Mexico.  They have thus become engaged in what has been called
involuntary lending; this will be discussed below.  
   The large money-center banks have an interest in the stability of the
international financial system in addition to their narrow profit concern in
Mexico.  Smaller banks have more leeway; their exposure relative to their capital
is generally less in Mexico than that of the larger banks and they are less
amenable to arguments that they must continue to lend to protect the
international system.  Many of them are taking losses and walking away from
Mexico.  
   While the foreign banks were a vital part of the process, Mexico helped get
itself into trouble.  The fiscal excesses of Echeverria and Lopez Portillo, are
well documented.  Once Mexico got on the debt roller coaster, it could not
easily get off.  Since 1982, the government has sought to ease the disengagement
by a combination of dealing with the causes of the problem (that is, the
stabilization and modernization programs), easing the burden of servicing through
debt rescheduling, and seeking new debt to avoid an abrupt and painful
extrication.
   There is a potent social issue in Mexico.  The main sufferers from the
stabilization efforts have been those persons and families least able to cope with
hardships over and above those they already had.  The Mexican government,
friendly foreign governments such as that of the United States, and international
institutions all must take this hardship into account, but commercial banks, while
they are evidently aware of the social-political imperatives that the Mexican
authorities face, cannot be expected to allow compassion to drive their lending
activities. In the final analysis, Mexico must itself deal with the human
hardships, and its response to the debt problem must deal with the fundamentals
of development policy while simultaneously helping those who cannot wait for
the long term.  But Mexico needs help to do this.
   The essential ingredient now is some relief for Mexico to work out escapes
from past mistakes, based on a solid foundation for the future.  Cooperative
relations are needed, among the social groups in Mexico, between the foreign
banks and the Mexican authorities, and between Mexico and creditor governments
and international institutions.  None can escape facing the problems each had a
hand in creating.

Dealing with the Debt Issue
   The current international debt problem erupted in August 1982 when Mexico's
Secretary of Treasury, Jesus Silva Herzog, informed officials of the U.S.
government, the IMF, the World Bank, and private commercial banks that Mexico
had run out of foreign-exchange reserves and could not meet its debt-service
obligations.  This was the first act of what has become a continuing debt
drama; the United States and the international community provided bridge loans
to cover the period until Mexico completed its financing negotiations with the
IMF and the commercial banks. 
   Mexico's actions (in 1983 and 1984) following this first crisis were politically
courageous, financially prudent, and socially draconian at the time.  Mexico was
seen as the model debtor, one willing to confront its problems by reducing its
fiscal deficit, lowering real wages, and correcting the overvaluation of the peso. 
These key measures were incorporated in an agreement with the IMF that was to
run for three years, and were the quid pro quo for the financial actions of the
IMF, creditor governments, and private banks.
   However, there have been additional acts in the continuing debt drama.  By
the end of 1985, a year in which fiscal austerity gave way to expansion, Mexico
was no longer seen by the outside financial community as a model debtor. 
Indeed, the Mexican situation forced rethinking of what until then had been
conventional wisdom about the need for economic austerity to deal with a
combination of inflation and large deficits in the balance of payments.  The new
thinking, as it affected Mexico, was best exemplified in two specific actions --
the Baker plan, named after the U.S. Secretary of the Treasury James Baker, and
a new agreement with the IMF.   
   The Baker plan was introduced in October 1985 at the annual meetings of the
IMF and the World Bank in Seoul, Korea.  It contained three key elements: an
increase in lending to debtor countries from multilateral development institutions,
such as the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank, over the
three-year period 1986-1988; an increase in lending of $20 billion over the same
period by commercial banks, generally in conjunction with lending by the official
multilateral banks; and, as the debtor country counterpart, a series of measures
designed to foster economic growth, such as encouraging foreign investment, sale
of inefficient public-sector enterprises, reducing import protection, and
liberalizing capital markets.  
   To an observer not immersed in the previous orthodoxy of stabilization
programs, the proposals hardly seem radical.  They are rooted in a U.S.
philosophy that economic growth is best achieved when the public sector of
countries plays a modest role.  Indeed, they have been called the "classical
approach to balance-of-payments adjustment" in that the components of
correction are curtailing fiscal excesses and taking actions to promote exports
and reduce imports.   What was "fresh" about the Baker approach was that it
envisaged stabilization not merely in an atmosphere of economic austerity but of
growth, while dealing with the cost to service past debt buildup by forcing
lenders to provide new debt.  The Baker plan was welcomed in developing
countries because its premise was that debtors could grow out of their problems
rather than shrink out of them by economic decline.  
   Mexico's most recent agreement with the IMF, the second during the de la
Madrid administration, was announced in November 1986.  In addition to
features familiar to such agreements, such as monetary and credit policy designed
to lower inflation and a flexible exchange-rate policy as one tool for maintaining
balance-of-payments equilibrium, this stand-by agreement (as these IMF
agreements are called) also supported the Baker proposals for stimulating growth. 
These proposals are worth setting forth since they had a pathbreaking effect.
   The key condition of the 1982 IMF agreement was that Mexico would
drastically reduce its public-sector deficit as measured by its relationship to
Mexico's GDP.  This deficit, which can be referred to as a public-sector
borrowing requirement (PSBR), was then in fact reduced from more than 17
percent of GDP in 1982 to 7.7 percent in 1984, after which it started to rise
again.  A second effort to reduce the PSBR during the final years of the de la
Madrid administration almost certainly would not have been politically tenable
because it would have involved even further economic contraction.
   What was done instead was to recast the meaning of the public-sector deficit. 
Three definitions were identified: an overall deficit, an operational deficit, and a
primary balance.  The overall deficit is the familiar PSBR and at the time the
agreement was reached this was expected to be about 17 percent of GDP in
1986.  The operational deficit is calculated by subtracting the inflation
component of internal public debt from the overall deficit.  The economic
rationale is that the increase in nominal interest payments does not represent an
income transfer in real terms but instead compensates debt holders for the
erosion from inflation in the real value of the principal of the debt.  Translated
into less technical language, if personal demand is based on real balances or
wealth holdings, partial compensation of the decline in these balances from  the
effects of inflation will not lead to increased demand.  The primary balance is
the difference between public-sector receipts and outlays, excluding all interest
payments, domestic and foreign.  This balance is being used by the Mexican
authorities to measure the results of the fiscal effort in which it is engaged. 
The new IMF agreement deals with both the PSBR and the operational balance
but its stipulations focus primarily on the size of the latter.
   There is an economic basis for the use of different measures of the public-
sector deficit, but it is evident that the IMF was also motivated by noneconomic
considerations; the social hardship associated with a drastic reduction in the
PSBR would almost certainly not have been acceptable in Mexico.  It is here, in
the actual operations of the IMF, that the shift in philosophy in the Baker
proposal, from an emphasis on economic contraction to one of growth, had an
impact.  Though many critics (including this one) argue that the Baker plan
may be inadequate for dealing with the debt problem, its overall implications
have not been negligible -- as the Mexican case illustrates.
   The condition in the Baker plan that additional public and private financing
should be made available to debtor countries only if they pursue market-
dominated policies also found its way into the IMF agreement.  Mexico made
commitments to liberalize its trade regime and pursue a flexible exchange-rate
policy and its representatives said that the government would reduce the number
of state enterprises.
   Finally, the feature in the IMF agreement that attracted the most publicity
was the insistence that private banks contribute additional lending as a necessary
condition of the adjustment process.  The way this was put in the IMF press
release was that since Mexico was already in recession, its authorities were
relying "on the financial support of all creditors that have financed Mexico's
development in the past to help them implement a growth-oriented program." 
The external financing package to Mexico's public sector, most of which was for
1986-1987, had the following elements: $6 billion from commercial banks; $2.3
billion from the World Bank; $4 billion from the Inter-American Development
Bank; $2.5 billion from official bilateral creditors; and about $1.3 billion from the
IMF.  Not all of this was additional lending.  The package was referred to in
shorthand as being of $12 billion, which was the estimate of the new funds that
would enter Mexico in 1987.
   Hundreds of private banks from around the world were involved in this forced
lending program to Mexico and many of them balked, especially smaller ones. 
It took until March 1987, about five months for a program that had a life of
less than a year and a half, before the private bank package was completed.  We
can conclude, then, that the Baker plan premise of increased private lending to
heavily indebted countries pursuing market-oriented growth programs is more
easily promised than accomplished; and, based on the Mexican experience, that
such laborious bailing-in techniques are inadequate.  This inadequacy is
particularly clear for smaller banks not trapped by the constraints from excessive
past lending and which do not have the same concerns about the viability of the
international financial system as do the larger banks.  These smaller banks
believe they can get off this particular debt roller-coaster, or at least that they
can try, and it took considerable pressure from U.S. officials to get U.S. banks
to agree to contribute new funds to the Mexico package, as it did of IMF
authorities to convince banks in all creditor countries.  This aspect of the
Baker plan clearly has no future.
   New lending is only one element in dealing with the debt problem.  The other
is to face the service burden Mexico must bear on old debt.

                              Past Debt Rescheduling
   Recasting of obligations is undoubtedly as old as the oldest profession;  it is 
a common feature of government, business, and personal finance transactions. 
What is different about the recent period, particularly since the Mexican rescue
of 1982, is the magnitude of the debts being rescheduled and the frequency of
these negotiations.
   Mexico has gone to the rescheduling and refinancing well many times since
August 1982.  The reschedulings by both official and private creditors were at
first relatively modest.  Interest rates on rescheduled debt were high and the
term for repayment of principal was not extended very far into the future.  But
in successive negotiations, both the interest rate and the terms were eased. 
Mexico has, in fact, become the pioneer in the most recent rescheduling series
and in extracting terms from the private creditors that became benchmarks in
creditor negotiations with other countries.  But although every agreement
establishes some precedent for subsequent agreements, countries are still treated
on a case-by-case basis and precedent does not mean formula.  To cite just one
example, not each country receives most-favored-nation treatment, an interest
rate and terms as favorable as the best-case treatment that preceded it. The
Mexican rescheduling that accompanied the new financing discussed above merits
special attention because of its scope and its terms.  This agreement was
announced on September 30, 1986, and Table 7.4 sets forth the total debt
package; new loans for 1986 and 1987 represent the involuntary lending by the
commercial banks incorporated into the IMF agreement.    The $43.7 billion of
already outstanding public-sector debt with foreign commercial banks was
extended to a repayment term of 20 years, with seven years of grace during
which only interest is paid.  In other words, repayment of principal is not to
begin until the eighth year and be fully amortized (assuming no further
rescheduling) only in the year 2006.  The term of the new money for 1986 and
1987, the $6 billion, is 12 years, with five years of grace.  By granting such
long-term repayment schedules, private commercial banks have thus agreed to act
more or less as development banks.


                    Table 7.4  Mexican Foreign Debt Package of
                   September, 1986, With Private Bank Creditors
                               (Millions of dollars)


Package Elements                         Amounts

1.  Old debt balance                      43,700
2.  Debt contracted in 1983 and 1984       8,550
3.  New loans for 1986 and 19871           6,000
4.  Petroleum facility                       720
5.  Growth facility                          500
6.  Facility to maintain public
    investment                             1,200
7.  Ficorca                               11,200
8.  Interbank funds                         6000

        Total                             77,8702

Source:  El Mercado de Valores, October 6, 1986, p. 931.

1The new lending package was not completed until March 1987.

2While a total is given in the source, it is misleading since some
  elements of the package were definite and others contingent on
  future events.

  The interest rate on both the old and the new money was set at 13/16 of 1
percent above Libor (the London interbank offer rate), which comes to a spread
of about 0.81 percent.  (The spread refers to the difference between the cost of
money to the banks in the interbank market, Libor, and the interest charged to
Mexico.)  This was a new low for such reschedulings -- most of Mexico's earlier
debt carried an interest rate of between 1 1/8 and 1 1/2 percentage points over
Libor and some had been based on the spread over the prime rate in the United
States, which was higher than Libor -- and quickly became a benchmark for
reschedulings with other countries.  The Mexican authorities calculated that
the savings from the lower interest rates would be $294.7 million a year, which
is income foregone by the banks.  It is this arithmetic that troubles many banks
and explains the resistance to the settlement, especially coming on top of the
development-bank terms, the 20 years and seven years of grace, and the
precedent set for subsequent sovereign reschedulings.  
   Table 7.4 lists three contingency or special items that were part of the
combined IMF-commercial bank package.  The petroleum facility would provide up
to an additional $720 million to Mexico (more accurately, up to SDR 600 million,
which at the time was close to $720 million) if the petroleum price dropped
below $9 a barrel.  Under the investment facility, commercial banks would
provide up to $1.2 billion in case of a sudden decline in the external receipts of
the public sector.  Under a third facility, commercial banks would provide up to
$500 million in new funds if Mexican recovery did not permit a projected
increase in public investment in selected projects identified as having a high
domestic content of inputs and substantial secondary repercussions on the private
sector.  The World Bank agreed to guarantee up to 50 percent of commercial-
bank disbursements under this facility.  
   The Secretary of the Treasury, Gustavo Petricioli, informed the finance
committee of the Mexican Chamber of Deputies on October 22, 1986 of Mexico's
accomplishments in its debt negotiations and what future debt strategy would
be.  He stressed the following points: the approximately $12 million of new
financing that was to be made available in 1986-1987; the generous terms and
low interest rate of the rescheduling, which together with the new financing
meant that net resource transfers from Mexico to the exterior would decline
from 5.6 percent of GDP in 1985 to l.9 percent in 1987; the restructuring of
more than $11 billion of private debt through the intermediary of Ficorca (table
7.4); the extension for at least three years of a $6 billion interbank line of
credit (table 7.4); and the ability these features gave to permit Mexico to resume
economic growth.  
   It would be unwise to be too exuberant about the package.  While it resolved
a short-term foreign-exchange problem, thereby giving the Mexican authorities
breathing room to restore economic growth, it still left major problems to be
resolved.  The most important of these was the continuing high rate of inflation
in Mexico and the most durable is carrying out the program to restructure the
Mexican economy, particularly to make industry more competitive on an
international scale.  And the total outstanding debt of more than $108 billion at
the end of 1987 is still enormous.  But the debt package did demonstrate that
when the IMF, the World Bank, and the U.S. government work together, devising
a growth-oriented strategy for a debtor country is possible.  Although the
commercial banks went along in this case, it is unlikely they will do so in the
future.
   One final element of debt rescheduling should be mentioned.  In addition to
working out arrangements with commercial banks, Mexico renegotiated its debts
with official creditors.  These negotiations took place in a forum known as the
Paris Club.  Mexico had first resorted to the Paris Club shortly after the 1982
crisis erupted; the 1986 agreement restructured those debt maturities falling due
between September 22, 1986 and March 31, 1988, amounting to $1.5 billion, with
a term of 10 years, with five years of grace.  In addition, the restructuring
included 60 percent of the interest payments falling due between September 1986
and the end of 1987, or some $282 of $470 million.
   Mexico has chosen to meet its external debt obligations in a renegotiated
form, while other countries -- including Peru, Ecuador, and Brazil -- have ceased
meeting their contractual debt-service obligations, in whole or in part, over
longer or shorter periods; in return, Mexico has been accorded what can only be
called generous treatment as commercial banks and creditor governments view
these things.  It is doubtful, however, that this generosity will be enough; it is
likely that Mexico's entire debt situation will require some further restructuring. 

                                Where Things Stand
   Perhaps the best description of how creditors have handled the debt problem
is "creative muddling through."  The muddling through is represented by creditor
insistence at first on high spreads, short repayment terms for principal, yearly
renegotiations as the best way to keep pressure on debtor governments to take
corrective actions to deal with their internal economies and balance of payments,
and, in essence, walking away from the social-political problems this posture
caused in debtor countries.  The hope was that debtor countries would grow out
of the debt problem, that it was a passing matter of liquidity and not a
pervasive structural phenomenon.  Insufficient liquidity is essentially a short-term
problem; structural reform is a long-term undertaking. 
   The creativity in the muddling manifested itself as the debt problem persisted. 
Spreads declined, amortization periods were lengthened, official creditors formally
capitalized interest obligations and they gave debtors multiyear rescheduling
agreements (known as Myras) rather than engage in year-by-year negotiations.
The creativity was grudging, though.  It took great pressure from the U.S.
government and international agencies to bring along the private banks in the
Mexican case.  Banks must ask themselves why they should provide new money
as old loans are sold at a deep discount.  When Citibank decided in May 1987
to increase its reserve against developing country loans, this meant essentially
that the bank's portfolio of these loans was being written down.  The Citibank
action was quickly followed by other U.S. banks.  This was a decision to seek to
divest billions of dollars of existing loans to developing countries, at a discount. 
This decision hardly presages a willingness by banks to make new loans to the
same countries whose old loans were written down.
   The kinds of solutions, if that is the proper word, that have been suggested
for the debt problem fall into four broad categories, not necessarily mutually
exclusive.  These are: to grow out of the problem; forgive part of the debt,
either interest or principal, or both; push the problem forward, such as by
capitalizing interest or stretching out the scheduled amortization of principal;
and to pay part of the principal of the debt in local currency as opposed to
foreign exchange.  Each of these categories of solutions has a number of
permutations and there are many combinations among the categories.  There also
has been a running debate as to whether solutions can be generalized for all
debtor countries, whether each case must be dealt with on its own merits, or
whether some combination of a generalized approach differentiated in its
implementation by the specific country circumstances offers the best solution.
   The Baker plan assumed that debtor countries can grow out of their debt
problems, and that the necessary ingredients for such growth are more short-
term financing and long-term growth-oriented restructuring of economies.  The
Mexican case was a significant one for testing U.S. policy because the effort
under the Baker plan was greatest there.  The plan played a positive role in
acknowledging that Mexico could deal with its economic problems by growing
instead of contracting its economy, but in other respects it must be adjudged a
failure.
   A number of scenarios can be constructed projecting Mexico's export
earnings, its current-account performance, the success of its economic
restructuring, and the treatment afforded to Mexican exports by the United
States.  The outcomes of these scenarios will differ depending on the world price
of oil, the growth of Mexican nonoil exports, the handling of Mexico's public
revenues and expenditures, and the influence of the exchange rate on trade and
capital flows.  Under extremely optimistic assumptions, Mexico can indeed be
projected as growing out of its debt problems, but there are many skeptics.  
Growing out of the debt problem requires a long-term view whereas the
political-social situation in Mexico requires short-term improvement in the form
of renewed economic growth.  The two are not incompatible, but success of the
long-term program is not independent of short-term results.
   Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey has proposed a plan to forgive some
principal and interest on outstanding debt.  Bradley's proposal is driven primarily
by the decline in U.S. exports to the large Latin American debtor countries as a
result of their stabilization programs.  The assumption of the plan is that the
resources that are made available by the debt relief will be used to buy more
imports from the United States.  He calls for an annual debt/trade conference by
the World Bank; debtor countries agreeing at this forum to undertake economic
reforms, chosen by them, would receive 3 percentage points of interest rate
relief for three years on outstanding private and official bilateral loans, plus a 3
percent write-down of principal each year for three years; and multilateral
development banks, whose loans would not be written down, would commit
themselves to increase their lending by $3 billion a year over the three years. 
What happens at the end of three years would presumably depend on the
international economic situation at that time. 
   The "hit" in the Bradley plan would be taken primarily by the commercial
banks, who therefore do not welcome it.  The banks and the U.S. Treasury argue
that forcing the banks to bear the burden of debt forgiveness will lead to
curtailed future lending to debtor countries.  This is the implication of the
Citibank action taking losses now on loans to debtor countries.   Yet there are
variants of the Bradley plan under which banks are willing to write down current
loans.  Japanese banks in March 1987 created what is best described as an
offshore factoring company to which they will sell their loans at a discount,
shifting collection to the new company.  In this way, the banks acquire loanable
funds for other purposes rather than keep them frozen in what are largely
sterile accounts.  By increasing their reserves against developing country loans,
U.S. banks positioned themselves to sell such loans at a discount, though they
may need relief from regulators in order not to have to write down the value of
loans they choose not to sell.  (About a third of all commercial bank loans to
Mexico are held by U.S. banks.)
   The institution buying discounted loans need not be one created by the banks
themselves.  Proposals have been made for the World Bank or the IMF to play
this role permitting them to combine debt relief with their other programs.   
The risk is that it might endanger their own credit standing in world financial
markets.  It is not clear just how the secondary market for the discounted sale
of sovereign loans will develop.  
   In early 1988, Mexico, in cooperation with the U.S. Treasury and J.P. Morgan
Bank, devised an innovative financing plan to take advantage of the discount at
which Mexican debt was selling.  Under the scheme, creditor banks were offered
new Mexican bonds in exchange for the debt they already held.  The attraction
of the new Mexican securities was that the principal would be collateralized by
nonmarketable zero-coupon bonds issued by the U.S. Treasury.  Stated simply,
the plan was for Mexico to buy $10 billion of 20-year U.S. bonds which, since
they paid no interest until maturity, would cost about $2 billion.  It was
expected that the new bonds which Mexico would issue, for which the zero-
coupon bonds would be collateral, would be swapped for existing debt tendered
at a discount of about 40 percent.  The end result would be to reduce Mexico's
total outstanding debt and lower interest costs.
   The actual bidding for the new bonds was disappointing.  Mexico accepted
bids from 95 foreign creditor banks covering $3.67 billion of old debt and in turn
issued $2.56 billion of 20-year bonds, which came to 69.77 cents of new debt for
each dollar of old debt.  Most large U.S. banks shunned the Mexican offer.  The
main bidders were large non-U.S. banks and some regional U.S. banks which
found this an attractive way to exit from their old credits to Mexico.
   The third general type of debt solution is to push payments off into the
future.  Commercial banks now do this regularly for amortization of principal. 
The Paris Club has done this explicitly by rescheduling interest obligations, as
noted above.  New loans that permit old interest to be paid do this as well in a
more roundabout way.  Peru has been limiting its debt service to a proportion of
its export earnings (ostensibly 10 percent) and this is a form of capitalization of
interest (assuming that Peru some day does repay its debt).  Two U.S. analysts
have argued that the debt-service payments could be limited to a proportion of
either GDP or earnings from exports.  The capitalization of interest obligations
is also one of the solutions suggested by the Economic Commission for Latin
America and the Caribbean (Eclac) in a special conference held in Mexico City in
January 1987.
   The logic of delaying payments is twofold: it permits use of the resources
now for development programs that can take effect only over time; and inflation
in creditor countries may effectively reduce the real burden of future payments. 
Inflation is also the basis of the argument that banks are well advised to sell off
doubtful loans at a discount now.  The motivation for the banks to establish a
substantial secondary market for developing-country debt gained much credibility
after the low interest-rate spread and the long term amortization granted in the
1986 Mexican package.  Debtors prefer to pay in the future, especially in an
inflationary environment; and creditors in this environment should prefer payment
now, especially if the interest received is low, as the 13/16 of 1 percent spread
over Libor is.
   The final broad type of solution is to deal with what is known in economics
as the transfer problem, namely, the need to generate foreign exchange to meet
an obligation that exists in foreign currency.  Beyond buying back its own debt
at a discount, there are only two ways for Mexico to reduce the absolute size of
its foreign debt:  run a surplus in its current account thereby permitting the
outflow of resources without increasing debt; or procure an inflow of capital to
acquire Mexican assets.  Both techniques are being used in dealing with the debt
problem.
   Mexico established criteria under which debt can be exchanged for equity in
Mexican companies.  The idea was for foreign investors to buy Mexican debt
at a discount and convert these debt instruments into pesos for investment in
Mexico.  The Mexican regulations gave priority to investment in certain
activities, especially those likely to lead to increased exports and bring advanced
technology into Mexico.  Preference was given to activities integrated into the
economy of the country, not the kind of enclave operation that prevails for the
maquiladora.  Mexico had close to $2 billion in swaps completed or in the
pipeline by early 1987, but it is unclear how much of this investment would have
come anyway and whether swaps are mostly a cheap way for investors to expand
activities.  Mexico suspended debt-equity swaps in 1987 because they increased
monetary expansion, and thus aggravated inflation, as pesos were issued to buy
back the debt.
   Two Mexican economists, Victor Urquidi and Saul Trejo, have proposed a
twist on debt-equity swaps.  Their suggestion is that part of the interest on
foreign debt be paid in local currency for the account of the creditor banks,
which would then use these peso funds to invest in export-oriented activities. 
Trejo has also argued that debt must be analyzed in a broad international
context and that Mexico's economic needs can be met only through an expansion
of exports; if this occurred, the export interest of the United States (which is
what stimulated the Bradley proposals) would also be furthered.  Trejo was
even more explicit about the link between local-currency payments of part of the
interest and investment in export-oriented industries in an article in which he
quantified the consequences of the proposal for Mexico and the creditors. 
Felix Rohatyn and Roger Altman have proposed a variant of the Urquidi-Trejo
idea by suggesting that a joint U.S.-Mexico development-finance authority be
established which would have two functions: to swap its securities for Mexican
debt held by U.S. banks; and to organize and finance manufacturing facilities in
Mexico.  The proposal calls for a guarantee from the U.S. side for the securities
issued by the finance authority.
   The objective of all the debt-relief proposals, whether they relate specifically
to Mexico or to debtor countries generally, is to stimulate economic growth. 
Those persons who advocate forgiveness of part of the debt, capitalizing some
interest and extending the term for amortization, or repayment of some
obligations in local currency, or some combination of all of these, believe that
the resources thus freed can be (would be) used for productive investment within
the debtor countries.  Many of the proposals seek to assure that the resources
will be so used by involving the commercial banks or the World Bank in the
disposition of the resources.
   Mexico has a double consideration in dealing with its external debt --
minimizing the outflow of resources for debt repayment, but also continuing the
inflow of new resources at a reasonable cost; and it is reluctant to take an
action that accomplished the first objective at the expense of the second.   
   It is not hard to think up specific debt-relief schemes.  If a decision is made
about who takes the "hit" -- the debtor country, the budgets of creditor
countries, commercial banks, or all of these -- programs follow logically.  The
problem has been the reluctance of any of these groups to accept too much of
the cost of debt relief, although to date a disproportionate burden has fallen on
the population of the debtor country.  The creative part of the muddling-through
process has occurred only when forced by a crisis that concentrated minds; and
this is a disruptive way of operating.A Recommendation
   Paying the debt has been costly in more than monetary terms.   The major
cost has been imposed on the Mexican population.  Per capita incomes declined
during the sexenio of President de la Madrid for the first time in any
administration since the 1930s; the external debt service was not the only reason
for the fall in income, but was an important factor.  Resources amounting to
some 5 percent of GDP must leave Mexico each year; about one third of the
foreign exchange earned from exports of goods and services goes to service the
external debt.  This has compelled Mexico to limit its imports, and consequently
its rate of economic growth.  The political fallout has been substantial, and the
opposition on the left based its presidential campaign largely on the issue of
declaring a debt moratorium so that the hardship on the Mexican population can
be eased.
   U.S. producers have also paid a high price.  Mexico's imports of goods and
services are far below what they would have been with a higher rate of
economic growth.  If GDP growth in Mexico during the past six years had been
5 percent a year (which is slightly below the norm of the previous 50 years)
cumulative imports over this period could have been $35 billion more than they
were.  If U.S. producers captured only 60 percent of this higher figure (which
is lower than the proportion they have enjoyed), U.S. exports over the six years
would have been $21 billion higher.   This translates into about 100,000 U.S. jobs
a year.
   U.S. debt strategy has thus involved a tradeoff at the margin between
benefits going to financial institutions as opposed to producers of goods and
services.  By insisting that the debt be serviced, the choice has favored the
financial institutions at the expense of the productive sector.  U.S. industrial
workers have been caught up in this tradeoff and were losers as well.
   Relations between Mexico and the United States have suffered.  While the
majority of the external debt is owed to non-U.S. banks, the average Mexican
sees the United States as the creditor.  The blame for the hardship caused by
the need to make debt payments is placed jointly on the Mexican and U.S.
governments.  This was evident in the speeches by Cuauhtemoc Cardenas in his
presidential campaign.
   The current debt situation is thus unsatisfactory to Mexicans most in need of
relief and to American producers and industrial workers.  More definitive relief
than step-by-step muddling through is now appropriate.  So are steps to share
the burden more equally among all the parties involved in the debt buildup --
including the banks.  The argument that debt relief will dry up new lending to
Mexico would be more convincing if lending had not already dried up.  A
healthy, economically growing Mexico will be a better prospect for new lending
than a Mexico that must live from hand to mouth.
   The U.S. government, in cooperation with other creditor governments, should
take the initiative to reduce Mexico's debt-service burden.  The exact form this
relief should take will not be spelled out here; there are already many proposals
on the table and these can serve as inputs to discussions among the parties
involved.  The relief can have the mix of elements analyzed earlier:  some
reduction of the total debt and annual payments; stretching out payments; and
using swap techniques involving payments in pesos rather than in foreign
exchange.
   However, the general criteria on which debt relief should be based must be
clear.  These include the following:
   - The relief should be substantial enough to permit restoration of positive per
capita income growth.  The Baker plan contemplated that growth would take
place by building the total debt further; however, substantial new lending is
unlikely under current circumstances of economic stagnation in Mexico.  The
proposal here assumes that sufficient economic growth will be more likely if
Mexico can retain more of its own resources.
   - Burden sharing should be more equitably divided between the borrower (the
Mexican government and its entities) and the lenders.  Most banks are in a far
better position to share this burden today than they were when the debt crisis
first erupted in 1982.
   - The debt relief should not be automatic, but require credible commitments
from Mexico on its economic policy. Neither banks nor individual governments
are well placed to extract these conditions; hence, the international financial
institutions (the IMF, World Bank, and the Inter-American Development Bank)
should be involved.  These institutions can also make their provision of new
capital contingent on Mexico meeting its commitments.
   - Governments must be engaged, both on the creditor and debtor sides, since
only they are in a position to provide guarantees in the event these will be
needed; or alter banking regulations, if this is needed.  And only they are in a
position to place the debt situation into the broader context of the total
political-economic relationship with Mexico.
   The need for policy commitments by Mexico merits emphasis.  Mexico has not
been consistent in its stabilization policy and not fully successful either.  The
internal inflation was attacked primarily by keeping wages down; apart from the
hardship this caused, it was not working.  Consumer prices in 1987 rose by about
160 percent.  The PSBR continued to rise -- it was more than 17 percent of
GDP in 1987; and because of the inflation, the interest rate for government
borrowing approached 200 percent.  The internal debt had become far more
onerous than the external debt; measured in relation to the GDP, the cost to
service the external debt in 1987 was 5 percent and the internal more than three
times this, 16 percent.
   The need for a more forceful approach to economic stabilization was evident
and in December 1987, the government announced what it called an Economic
Solidarity Pact (PSE from its initials in Spanish), which has involved a
combination of declines in planned levels of government spending, price and wage
controls, and temporarily freezing the exchange rate.  The goal of this
modified shock treatment was to reduce the monthly rate of inflation from about
10 to less than 2 percent.  The PSE is a serious program, but a substantial
debt-relief package requires assurance that seriousness will carry over into the
next administration.
   The plural -- governments -- was used above because debt relief for Mexico
must involve creditor countries in addition to the United States.  However, the
United States must take the lead; no other creditor nation has as large a stake
in the wellbeing of Mexico.  The process of consultation should start as early as
possible (now, at the latest) between the public and private sectors within the
United States and between the United States and other countries -- and then
between all of them and the Mexican authorities.  The most propitious time to
put new debt arrangements in place is 1989, early in the administrations of the
new presidents in both Mexico and the United States.
   The failure to work out a comprehensive debt-relief scheme for Mexico does
not mean that there will be no relief.  Rather, it means that the next debt
package will be devised in an atmosphere of crisis, as have past arrangements.The better part of statesmanship is to act calmly in advance of what is coming
in any event.Notes
