



                                    CHAPTER 10
                          Conclusions and Recommendations


   But the exterior is seen in Mexico, for profound historical
reasons, as a source of dangers, not of opportunities.  Gabriel Zaid,
1984.

   I am perfectly aware how difficult it must be to deal with a
country so powerful and so immediate.  It is evident that one of the
most difficult problems for Mexican chiefs of state is the equilibrium
in this relation.  Mauricio Gonzalez de la Garza, 1987.


   It is no exaggeration to say that the twin sisters of ignorance and
arrogance define the behavior of the generality of  North Americans
[toward Mexico].  Octavio Paz, 1986.



The Motivation
   I have devoted years to examining the U.S.-Mexico relationship in the
conviction that each country is the other's most important partner.  The
interaction between the two countries is circumscribed by differences in history
and culture and vast disparities in economic and international political power,
but it is also shaped by mutual necessity.  The relationship has not always been
a happy one and it may never be intimate (although the word "never" covers too
long a time), but it is inevitable.  It can also be more productive.

What Is Happening in Mexico?
   Every reader of detective stories knows that the crucial moment for Sherlock
Holmes in "The Adventure of Silver Blaze" came when he grasped the meaning of
why the dog did not bark.   The first approach to interpreting events in Mexico
since 1982 is to try to understand why there was no widespread turbulence.  If
real wages in the United States declined by 50 percent over a six-year period
and inflation soared to more than 100 percent a year, it is doubtful that the
political-economic structure of the nation would survive intact.
   There is no single explanation of why the Mexican population endured what it
did, surely with deep dismay, but also mostly tranquilly resigned to adversity. 
Most Mexicans are conservative, preferring incremental to sudden change,
revolutionary rhetoric notwithstanding.  Those who have suffered most from the
economic policies since 1982, the very poor, are too busy coping to have much
time or energy for political activism.  The middle class, the traditional shapers
of revolutions, have weathered the stabilization experience with less hardship
than their poorer brethren.  The economic deterioration of individual and family
situations came in discrete steps and this left hope for improvement next year or
the year after that.  The underground economy also must have absorbed some of
the shock of declining incomes.
   The lack of widespread social disruption does not mean that Mexico has
remained as it was before the 1980s.  The evidence I have presented
demonstrates the reverse -- the changes taking place in Mexico are more
profound than at any time since the 1930s, perhaps since the revolution.  The
changes in economic policy and political patterns would have occurred in any
event in the fullness of time, but the pace was accelerated by a series of
simultaneous internal and external shocks.  The abrupt decline in oil prices and
the depletion of foreign-exchange reserves to meet debt-service obligations made
evident the exhaustion of the development-from-within model.  The subsequent
stabilization program led to drastic declines in per capita income; this was a new
experience for modern, PRI-dominated Mexico.  Inflation has been out of control
for some ten years.   
   The deficiencies of Mexican-style democracy were violently manifest in the
student riots of the 1968.  The political system was tested repeatedly in the
1980s as the economy declined and it is evident that the PRI is unprepared to
face truly democratic choice.  This will have to be extracted; it will not be
willingly granted.  
   Mexico thus faces a complex modernization dealing with its economic
structure, its long-standing social inequalities, and the extent of political choice
available to its population.  The multifaceted, inseparable challenge pervades
every aspect of Mexican society, from the crumbling social compact between the
state and its people to policies for dealing with specific issues, such as
education, the provision of social services, inflation, debt payment, techniques
for industrialization, and relations with the external world.    
   There is no simple catch-all phrase to describe Mexico's political structure. 
Its features have counterparts elsewhere, but the totality is unique to Mexico. 
Other places have had durable political machines whose foundation was caring
for the faithful and rendering service for its client population; this was typical
of many U.S. states and cities for many years.  Other countries have had
sustained electoral domination by a single party at the national level; this has
been the case in post-war Japan.  The practice of placing leading political and
governmental figures in critical jobs controlled by the government is widespread;
this occurs with frequency in France, for example.
   Mexico's regular elections are mostly a formality, but occasionally results
adverse to the PRI have been accepted at the municipal level, albeit with bad
grace.  The near certainty of PRI victories in elections at all levels combines
with other features to explain the durable one-party dominance:  the
concentration of power in the central government; the rewarding of loyal
political and bureaucratic figures; the ability to control the leading sectors of
the economy; and the sophisticated paraphernalia to coopt significant potential
dissidents.  But the edifice depends on economic growth for its success and has
come under pressure as the economy declined.  
   A caveat must be entered, however.  While Mexico is not a democracy with
respect to effective suffrage, neither is it a dictatorship.  It does have
oppressive features, such as summary arrests and muzzling of dissent.  The press
generally echoes a government line, but opposition news and opinion media do
exist.  Judicial procedures vary from those in the United States, especially
regarding the normal length of pre-trial detention in criminal cases, but Mexico
has a functioning judicial system.  The legislature is not equal to the executive,
nor does it have independent power, but opposition legislators conduct debates
on significant issues more frequently than in the past.  Opposition political
parties are rarely permitted to win, but their candidates can campaign and seek
to influence public opinion.  The 1988 presidential campaign had non-trivial
candidates from the left and the right as well as from the PRI.  
   In sum, Mexico has elements of democracy alongside one-party control.  The
presidential system has a number of key features: these include the choice of his
successor by the incumbent, presumably in consultation with key leaders of the
PRI (and, in 1987, even public television presentation of their views by the
leading PRI presidential precandidates); the exercise by the president during his
tenure of almost absolute power; and then, following his one six-year term, not
holding the president accountable for his acts while in office.  Gabriel Zaid has
described this arrangement as an obsolete contract that once had value as a
substitute for recourse to arms by squabbling caudillos.  He referred to this
implicit contract as pre-modern and now humiliating to Mexico.
   An insistent clamor for more complete democracy is now being heard in
Mexico.  Previous presidents were subjected to public criticism after they left
office; this happened to both Echeverria and Lopez Portillo.  De la Madrid has
been castigated publicly even while in office.  Detailed articles are disseminated
documenting the fraud in elections.  The linking of democracy and morality has
become widespread.  "Moral renovation," one of the themes with which de la
Madrid entered office, can no longer simply mean curtailment of dishonest gain
by public officials;  moral renovation now means the growth of democracy, the
granting of effective suffrage.  
   There was coincidence in the simultaneous exhaustion of both the political
and economic underpinnings of the Mexican structure, but pressures for change
had been building for some time in both arenas.  The economic policies
undertaken by the de la Madrid administration, if carried to their logical
conclusion, will substantially alter institutions and habits by forcing Mexico to
look outward more than at any time since the revolution.  The changed structure
demands developing a competitiveness that did not exist earlier, and the use of
import tariffs will eliminate the role of the central government in case-by-case
import licensing.  Rents or unearned profits from import licenses will no longer
play an enriching role for the beneficiaries.  
   This is a major experiment in economic development.  An important question
is how the economic changes will play back on Mexico's political processes.  One
scenario is that as the economy opens, so too must the political structure.  This
is the view taken here.  Decentralized economic decision-making in which the
critical factor will be the marketplace and not functionaries will gradually erode
the basis for the existing bureaucratic-political machinery.  Until now, the
principal monetary beneficiaries of the system have been business, the middle
class, and some favored labor unions.   Most groups will not lose their
monetary benefits under the new economic policy, but they, particularly business,
will have acquired more power to make their own economic decisions.  The
freedom to make these choices is apt to be contagious; freedom may not be able
to be compartmentalized into economic and political segments.  
   There is a potential opposing scenario, that the shift in economic policy is so
important, that the stakes for the players are so high, that political closing, at
least temporarily, is the more likely outcome.  This pattern, prevalent in Mexico
since 1982, also characterized the Chilean experience under Pinochet, and the
development patterns in South Korea and Taiwan.  But the Chilean, Korean, and
Taiwanese examples are not exact parallels; their political structures were more
repressive than the Mexican model.  Mexico, by contrast, wishes to take its
place among the world's democratic societies, and a shift away from democracy
to the Chilean model under Pinochet, for example, would run counter to the
pattern and pressures coming from Latin America as a whole.  It would take
force to frustrate the popular pressure for political opening.  
   There is a third possible scenario, that if economic reform seems to be
leading to unacceptable political changes, the economic opening itself will be
aborted.  Many Mexicans advocate precisely this, a reversion to an economic
model even more state-led than the earlier development-from-within policy. 
Even if adopted, this is unlikely to be a durable scenario because the Mexican
market lacks the purchasing power to make it viable.  It would also run counter
to what is by now a worldwide trend toward less state involvement.
   Mexico no longer has the luxury of avoiding decisions about the economy. 
Raymond Vernon wrote in 1963 that Mexico's political system either had to find
the means to reduce the extent of its control over the economy in the hope that
this would unleash dynamic forces generating growth, or find other ways to
respond to the country's changing needs even if this sacrificed "the appearance
of legitimacy."  Mexico was able to procrastinate in the 1960s because it was
not evident to the country's political leadership that the old model had run its
course.  It was possible to defer restructuring in the 1970s because receipts from
oil and debt masked other economic deficiencies.  But the evidence that the old
model was exhausted was unequivocal in the 1980s.  
   The thesis set forth here is that the combination of clamor for greater
political participation and the growing economic opening will reinforce each
other and that the end result, sooner more likely than later, will be a more open
and a more democratic Mexican society than the one that now exists.  Mitigation
of income inequalities is apt to be delayed, but will become harder to ignore if
the political system becomes more democratic.  This dual pressure for a fuller
political democracy and actual economic opening is the most important societal
development now taking place in Mexico.  

What is Happening in the United States?
   Recent U.S. economic policy has sometimes created severe problems for
Mexico and sometimes been helpful.  Mexico paid a heavy price for the mix of
macroeconomic policy instruments used during the first phase of the Reagan
administration.  The high interest rates resulting from the restrictive U.S.
monetary policy aggravated Mexico's debt-service obligation at the very time
that oil prices plummeted.  And the reduction in U.S. inflation meant that the
real cost of debt servicing in dollars was higher than was anticipated when the
loans were contracted.  
   On the other hand, the steady U.S. economic growth during the 1980s
provided an outlet for Mexican exports.  This was particularly true in 1986 and
1987, when Mexican exchange-rate policy coupled with other export-promotion
measures led to soaring exports of manufactured goods to the United States.  
   These effects, the damaging and the helpful, occurred without any thought on
the part of U.S. policy makers to their impact on Mexico.  This point, noted
earlier, is worth stressing again:  the most important U.S. policy measures
affecting Mexico are taken inadvertently.  Those who look mainly at U.S. policy
directed specifically at Mexico are missing the main show.
   The United States is becoming more protectionist than at any time since the
Smoot-Hawley tariff period of the 1930s, a trend frightening to Mexico. 
Protectionist pressures have always existed in the United States, but these were
overwhelmed during the last 50 years by a trade-liberalizing philosophy. 
Protectionism was largely industry-specific, while trade policy generally was
directed to opening markets worldwide.  Mexico is partially the direct target of
this new protectionism, but is mostly caught up in a general sentiment favoring
what has come to be called fair trade.  
   The threat of U.S. protection against imports from Mexico causes a bitter
reaction because current Mexican export policy conforms to repeated U.S.
prodding over the years.  A Mexican policy maker could hardly be blamed for
concluding that the United States is willing to preach Mexican export promotion
as a general proposition only to restrict imports when the lecture is heeded.  
   The U.S. protectionist threat has contributed to changes in Mexican trade
policy.  The 1985 agreement with the United States on subsidies and
countervailing duties came in response to a raft of fair-trade petitions directed
against imports from Mexico.  The trade understanding (or framework
arrangement for fostering consultation) between the two countries signed in
November 1987 permits Mexico and the United States to consult on each other's
trade practices within 30 days of a request and called for immediate discussions
on textile, agricultural, steel, and electronics products, all of which are subject
to actual or threatened U.S. import restrictions.  (These led to a new textile
agreement and a modest increase in Mexico's steel quota in the United States.) 
The Mexican authorities were willing to sign this agreement and face domestic
criticism from the left about excessive bilateral trade relations with the United
States because they were concerned that the greater risk was U.S.
protectionism. 
   The United States also has begun a more restrictive immigration policy. 
Again, the stimulation for this is primarily internal, but will affect developments
in Mexico if the flow of undocumented workers is sharply curtailed.  
   The contrast between recent tendencies in the United States and those in
Mexico is worth drawing with some precision.  Mexico is increasingly looking
outward on trade matters as the United States moves to protect its home
market.  U.S. restriction of undocumented immigrants comes at the very time
that Mexican population policy is working to reduce population growth rates. 
Mexico has been willing to inflict hardships on its domestic population in order
to meet interest payments on its external debt at a time when practically every
U.S. politician flees from the very thought of burdening the U.S. population with
higher taxes.  The overall impression is that Mexico is showing greater economic
courage than is the United States.

What is Happening to the Relationship?
   The trauma of the 1980s forced Mexico to look closely at its options.  One
result of this examination was to stress economic cooperation with the United
States.  This is evident in the trade opening, the increasing welcome to foreign
investment, the seeking out of the U.S. market for nonoil exports, and the
signing of two bilateral trade agreements.  But the United States is distrusted by
many Mexicans, especially intellectuals, so that much internal rhetoric still
stresses nationalism and distancing from the United States, even as Mexico's
economic policy brings the two nations closer.  
   The U.S. response has been a mixture of acceptance of the new Mexican
initiatives and harshness over what are seen as Mexico's shortcomings.  The
former is best exemplified in the two trade agreements, the latter in the drug
issue.  It is doubtful, however, that the United States will again neglect
relations with Mexico to the degree it did as recently as a decade ago; U.S.
self-interest in Mexico's well-being is now evident.  Turmoil in Mexico cannot be
contained at the border and U.S. policy must do what it can to prevent this
outcome.  Mexico is also a significant supplier of oil and the third-largest
market for U.S. exports even at a time when its economy is not prospering; the
market potential is vast once Mexico prospers again.  Mexico's inability to meet
its debt service in 1982 concentrated financial minds in the United States about
the importance of its southern neighbor, and U.S. presidential candidates now
find it necessary to set forth a specific policy toward Mexico dealing with such
issues as trade and investment, debt, migration, oil, and hemispheric security.
   The industrial integration of the two economies is also impressing itself on
the minds of policy makers in the two countries.  This is apt to be the most
important defense against U.S. restrictions on imports from Mexico. 
Protectionism would affect U.S. producers and workers who provide intermediate
and capital goods to Mexico and purchase needed intermediate goods from
Mexican suppliers.  These cross-border alliances between mutually dependent
producers are growing more powerful daily.  
   The nature of the political structure in Mexico is an internal issue, but it
inevitably affects relations with the United States.  The talk of a special
relationship with Mexico arises from time to time, but "special" always had a
different degree of warmth as it applied to Mexico compared with other
countries where the word is used, such as Great Britain.  This is so for
historical reasons and also because the affection for a  democracy is deeper than
for a country that is still authoritarian.  There is a difference between a
relationship born out of necessity and one conceived in respect.  The conviction
that Mexico's institutions foster corruption also reduces U.S. confidence in the
relationship, for although the United States is not without corruption, Mexico's
is perceived to be more extensive.
   The qualifications to its democracy have implications for Mexican foreign
policy much broader than relations with the United States.  Delal Baer has noted
that much of Mexico's foreign policy is based on general principles rather than
international reality.  Moral arguments, such as those favoring international
economic justice, have less resonance on audiences in democratic countries when
they are seen as coming from a country which itself is authoritarian; and these
Mexican pronouncements are seen in the United States as intended for a Mexican
audience and not for serious foreign consideration.  An analogy can be made
with Mexico's trade posture.  As long as Mexico was outside the GATT, its
statements on trade issues were received as those of a free rider.  This has now
changed.  So too will Mexico's moral influence on other global issues as its
political system becomes more open.  
   The vast economic and power disparities between Mexico and the United
States are not amenable to changes in the short term.  The two countries have
dissimilar historical and cultural formations.  Beyond this, the relationship is
often inflamed by hostile behavior by both sides.  Their disrespectful discourse is
a vivid example of this.  The episodic official U.S. attention to Mexico is
evidence of condescension, even though Mexico is no longer a country run by
caudillos, but rather by sophisticated politicians and technocrats.
   Mexico, for its part, does not abet a cooperative relationship by continuing to
believe that it can obtain economic concessions even as it constantly lambasts
the United States at home and in foreign-policy forums.  U.S. officials read what
is disseminated by the Mexican authorities for the domestic audience and this
influences their responses to what Mexico requests when it speaks
internationally.
   Despite their differences, despite the frequent incivility, the two countries
have a joint destiny determined by geography.  This is not disputable
intellectually, and it is now being recognized increasingly in action as well.

Main Recommendations
   The broad conclusion from the analysis in this book is that for better or
worse, in good times and especially in bad, the behavior of either Mexico or the
United States deeply affects the other.  The marriage metaphor may be too
legalistic, but there is certainly an inseparable meaningful relationship.  The key
recommendation that flows from this analysis, stated simply, is that the two
countries should make the most of this situation.  The first step to improved
relations is to accept the intimate nature of the relationship, since only then can
other cooperative actions follow, as many have during the recent years of
Mexican adversity.
   The policy chapters of this book deal with specific functional issues in the
relationship.  Not all the recommendations in the separate chapters will be
repeated here; the main ones will be summarized.  Some suggestions are directed
to Mexico, others to the United States.  However, optimizing the relationship
requires taking a broader view than function-by-function activities.  What is
necessary is that the authorities of each country recognize the problems,
limitations, idiosyncracies, culture, and historic formation of the other.  Mexico
will not be taken seriously if it repeatedly abuses the United States in
international and domestic forums; the real and the verbal aspects of the
relationship are not easily separable.  The United States will not be seen as a
friend if it continues to approach relations with Mexico in a condescending way;
this, unfortunately, has been typified in recent years by name calling in the
effort to control drug traffic and by patronizing lecturing by U.S. officials.
   Neither country is a unified whole when it comes to attitudes toward the
other.  This is evident, but worth stating nevertheless.  The United States
should not attribute to all of Mexico what is an essentially anti-American press. 
Mexicans should not conclude that anti-Mexican views of particular U.S. senators
or congresspersons represent the view of the whole Congress, let alone of the
United States.  
   The specific functional recommendations build on developments taking place in
each country.  The most important of these relate to the role reversals in trade
policy, the opening in Mexico and the closing in the United States.  The
viewpoint taken throughout this book is that Mexico's economic opening is the
correct path toward renewed and sustainable economic growth.  The reason for
this is that the internal market is inadequate for Mexico to meet its economic
growth aspirations.  Even during the phase of easy import substitution, in the
decades when the growth of GDP was consistently high, almost half of Mexico's
population benefited only marginally.  Assuming that Mexico continues the trade
policy direction it has chosen, the principal recommendation must be directed to
the U.S. government: it must support this Mexican policy in word and deed. 
This means U.S. industries will have to adjust as Mexican industry becomes more
competitive; many U.S. workers will be hurt and they deserve support, but
through financial adjustment and retraining rather than by frustrating the
Mexican effort through U.S. import restraints.  The totality of U.S. industry and
workers will benefit if Mexico prospers.  The requirement for U.S. policy is to
compensate those individuals who are hurt from the much larger benefits that
accrue to U.S. society as a whole.  
   One additional point should be made about U.S. protection.  It is generally
specific to industries in which wages make up a significant portion of total unit
costs.  U.S. industry cannot compete with Mexican production on the basis of
which country pays the lower wages.  Mexican wages will invariably be lower at
this stage of their respective histories.  The more productive attitude, then, is
for each country to establish a policy framework that encourages industrial
complementarity.  This has been called managed industrial integration in these
pages.  It requires modest or even zero levels of protection in each country for
the import of inputs from the other.  Official agreements under which the
governments decide the sectors in which private entrepreneurs should operate are
neither needed nor desirable; this is precisely the type of microeconomic decision
the market is able to handle.  The best example of this is the development of
the maquiladora in which private parties took advantage of policy frameworks
established separately by the two countries.  
   The combination of relatively open markets and industrial production-sharing
should lead to a quantum leap in bilateral trade.  The two countries would
become even more economically integrated than is now the case.  Would this also
make Mexico more vulnerable than it now is to decisions made in the United
States?  Perhaps, but since about 80 percent of Mexico's exports of manufactures
already go to the United States, it is hard to conceive of even greater
concentration.  Production sharing involves mutual vulnerabilities.  It also
generates cross-border alliances that are probably the best protection against
excessive protectionism.  While Mexican-U.S. trade should increase in absolute
terms under this combination of relatively open markets and more extensive
production sharing, increased competitiveness of Mexican industry should augment
its ability to diversify markets.  
   Why managed integration?  Why not let nature (events) take its (their)
course?  The management recommended here is an assurance of a policy
framework and not direct government involvement in the details of industrial
complementation.  Each government will inevitably involve itself in policy aspects
of its industrial development, from health and safety requirements to minimum
wages.  Managed integration is a way to assure investors that the two
governments support a policy of fostering complementarity.  
   Neither side is now confident that the other will not take actions prejudicial
to its well being.  These potential actions deal mostly with domestic matters in
each country, primarily macroeconomic policy.  Regular meetings of U.S. and
Canadian foreign ministers and treasury and central bank officials take place
precisely to avoid surprises.  The Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development in Paris and various other groupings of developed countries (the
group of five, of seven, of ten, and other sizes), plus the regular economic
summits of the leading industrial democracies also serve this consultative
purpose.  It is a measure of the inferior position that Mexico has played in U.S.
thinking that nothing comparable exists.  Consultation is not coordination. 
There is no way to fully shield Mexico from the inadvertent consequences of
U.S. policy.  At the margin, however, some U.S. policies might be modified, or
Mexico might be able to take some ameliorative action if forewarned.  The
consultation would be in both directions, since Mexico also takes actions that
affect U.S. nationals.  
   There is no functional area in which it is more vital for each side to be
aware of the official thinking of the other than on Mexico's foreign debt.  The
debt issue is potentially explosive in Mexico.  The decline in Mexican incomes in
recent years has been attributed  by the opposition on the left, and even by the
corriente democratica faction of the PRI, to Mexico's decision to keep paying
interest on its foreign debt.  These interest payments in recent years have been
about 5 to 6 percent of GDP and therefore represent a significant outflow of
resources.  The peso counterpart of these payments limits the government's
budgetary options.  The Mexican authorities have refused to declare a unilateral
moratorium on meeting external debt service, but maintaining this position
requires that the burden of the payments become less onerous. 
   The official U.S. approach to the debt is that Mexico can grow out of the
heavy burden that debt servicing now imposes; the Baker plan was predicated on
this thinking.  This approach, useful when introduced in 1985, is now a dead
letter.  Further debt shocks are conceivable, indeed likely, such as higher world
interest rates that would increase Mexico's resource outflow or drastic
curtailment of bank lending.  The two countries should avoid the crisis
atmosphere that prevailed during the last two debt restructurings, in 1982 and
1986, by negotiating now to reduce the interest cost of Mexico's external debt. 
Two new presidents coming to power almost simultaneously makes the moment
auspicious for such negotiations.
   A final precise recommendation deals with petroleum relations between the
two countries.  This, too, is sensitive, although for a different reason from debt. 
Oil represents Mexico's national heritage and selling oil and associated resources
to the United States, even at a large profit, is not universally welcome in that
country; this was evident from the reaction to the plan to sell natural gas to
the United States in 1977-1978.  It has also been evident that reliance on oil
exports is a mixed blessing.  This reliance not only petrolized the economy,
but led to income volatility as oil prices changed.  One way to minimize this
volatility is for Mexico to integrate its oil industry downstream, abroad as well
as at home, including to the retail level in the United States, as has been done
by Venezuela.  Downstream integration into the United States would permit
taking the profit on crude sales when these prices are high and on product sales
when the crude is treated as an input cost.  This would emulate the behavior of
the oil majors.
   While the immediate danger is not great, it is possible that the United States
will one day impose an oil-import fee.  Mexico has argued that it should be
exempt from any such levy in the interest of U.S. security of supply.  The logic
of the Mexican position would be more convincing if there were a long-term
supply agreement.  As politically sensitive as this is in Mexico, there is merit
for both countries in examining this possibility. 
   
Concluding Comments
   Great tension marks the U.S.-Mexico relationship -- differences separate the
two countries while their mutual dependence brings them together.  The two
pulls are always present; the unifying impulse dominates when Mexico reaches
out for help because there is no place to turn except to the United States.  The
instinct to separate is most powerful when Mexico feels strong and confident, an
attitude that has dominated for most of the period since World War II.  Mexico
has looked outward when in trouble and inward when prospering.  
   Mexico is now looking outward in a more profound way than at any time
since the revolution.  The shift in approach is not a one-shot affair, like a
bridge financing or a debt rescheduling, but a continuing reordering of the
economy.  Whatever the durability of the present phase of modernization, there
can be no looking back.  But the United States is not responding in kind.  Trade
protectionism is threatened.  Mexican officials are publicly charged with
dishonesty.  Both the Congress and the executive make threats to punish Mexico
if it does not cooperate in whatever field happens to be the current fancy,
whether it be the momentary politics of drugs, the treatment of particular
foreign investors, or not hewing to the U.S. posture in Central America.  The
important and enduring aspects of the relationship are being sacrificed to the
relatively trivial or temporal.  The impression that is left is that the U.S.
government has not grasped what is taking place in either the Mexican economy
or political structure.  
   Mexico will not jettison its heritage and it will continue to look south to
Latin America and to Spain for cultural nourishment even as it moves ever closer
to the United States in its economic programs and the ethnic intermingling of
the two countries.  The United States will not alter its heritage either, and will
continue to look to Europe for spiritual sustenance even as its political and
economic interests flourish with Mexico.  What is required, however, is a
recognition that each country can walk and chew gum at the same time.  They
can look in other directions even as they look to each other.  They can
cooperate, even with pressures for mutual distancing.  They can accept the
importance of the other even as each has relationships with third countries.  But
they can and must recognize that the U.S.-Mexican relationship will inevitably be
the most important for each of them because they are where they are.
NOTES
