





                                     CHAPTER 8
                                    The Border


   If the border is not economically integrated into the rest of the
country and does not see its future as working to improve the situation
of all Mexicans, it will have noalternative but to turn north, with all
the risks this implies.  Guillermina Valdes-Villalva, 1985.

   Why do you have to declare yourself for the Mexicans or for the
Americans?  U.S. citizen of Mexican origin in interview on Bill Moyers
television program, 1986.  

   And thus we come to the most preoccupying problem, namely, that
of underground water of the border region and its trail of consequences
for future Mexico-U.S. relations and eventually for the development of
very important adjoining areas.  Cesar Sepulveda, 1982.



Two Nations, One Destiny

   Patterns of life are different at border regions from those at inland areas. 
Societies come together at borders, sometimes in mutual animosity (as at the
long border between China and the Soviet Union or the shorter border between
Chile and Peru), sometimes in friendly interaction (as is generally true along the
extensive Canada-U.S. border).  Even where the relationship is amicable, the mix
of two sovereignties and separate cultures leads to social and political tensions. 
   There are scholars who specialize in border studies, but there is no
comprehensive theory of borders.  However, even if such a theory existed, a
special section would be needed for understanding the relationship where the
United States and Mexico meet.
   The U.S.-Mexico border has unique elements.  The most evident (the most
shocking, really) is the vast disparity in wealth.  In 1984, the per capita income
in the most affluent part of the U.S. border, the San Diego metropolitan area,
was more than six-and-one-half times that of Mexico ($2,040).  The disparity
diminishes drastically in the poorest county on the U.S. border, but while per
capita income in Starr county, Texas ($4,106) was only 30 percent of the United
States as a whole, it was still twice that of Mexico. Other Texas metropolitan
areas fall in between; El Paso's per capita income was about four times that of
Mexico's and Laredo's about three times.  
   The differences in income and wealth have their consequences.  Joseph Nalven
has noted that the air-pollution control office in San Diego has 100 staff
positions whereas that in Tijuana, whose population is about half that of the
combined region from Chula Vista to San Diego, has five; the San Diego budget
is 35 times that of Tijuana.  The differential resource availabilities are
replicated for almost all services, such as water pollution, sewage treatment and
control over waste disposal.
   Impulses at the border move in both directions, but there is a dominant-
subordinate influence.  Economic differences are manifested in assembly plants
that locate in Mexico to take advantage of cheap labor.  People move north,
mostly to improve their economic positions.  But the effects run deeper; values,
aspirations, and social mores are transmitted more thoroughly from the wealthier
to the poorer country.  Consumer habits are imported from the United States to
a people who are not able to afford a U.S. market basket of consumer goods.  
   There is also a political effect.  Democracy is entrenched in the United
States whereas it is qualified in Mexico; and it is no accident that Mexico's
northern border is the region most infected by the yearning for effective
suffrage.
   The border is a complex place.  Its population grew rapidly on both sides in
the 1950s and 1960s, particularly in Mexico.  The growth in population slowed
after that in Mexico.  Indeed, between 1970 and 1980, border growth was less
than Mexican population growth in general.  People living on the border have
been trained in their native culture and mores, but the constant interaction adds
a strong element of the foreign culture.  Tijuana is as unlike Mexico City as El
Paso is Boston.  Neither is the border mixture easily digestible.  A well-known
Mexican psychologist has noted: "For the Western world, one could hardly find a
pair of nations that would be more intensely different in historico-sociocultural
background than the United States of America and the Republic of Mexico." 
The result "...is a separate society, in a sense, with a unique culture of its own,
made up of elements which overlap and come from the two mother cultures."
   The border is a place of conflict and cooperation, of example and animosity,
of opportunity and frustration, and of separation and blending -- in each case to
a degree which does not exist generally in either nation.  This chapter will seek
to capture these contradictions by examining each country's economic, cultural,
political, and environmental impact on the other at the border -- although they
are not separable in practice.  Because the two countries are contiguous, much
U.S. demand for narcotics is met from Mexican production or using that country
as a transit point.  Another major influence of contiguity, transnational
migration patterns,  will be dealt with in chapter 9.  But the conclusion can be
stated here -- a border synthesis is inescapable.Mutual Impacts
   History contributes much to Mexican thinking about the border region.  This
is true for the totality of Mexican-U.S. relations, but the past is especially
neuralgic where the two countries meet.  It is hard to find a Mexican 
discussion of the border that does not recall the loss of Texas and other
territory to the United States under the treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo in 1848,
following the Mexican-American War.  This constant reference to Mexican
weakness and U.S. imperialism is part of the educational formation of Mexican
leaders.  This perennial reiteration does not signify that Mexico has rejected the
reality of history, but rather that the factors that led to the territorial loss
remain an important input into current policy.  For example, the region that now
forms of California, Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas was mostly unpopulated by
Mexicans at the time of the Texas war of independence and the Mexican-
American war, and one motivation for more recent Mexican industrial and
economic programs at the border was to avoid even the possibility of history
repeating itself if the area remained relatively unpopulated.  
   While fears of a new U.S. manifest destiny are occasionally heard in Mexico,
the realistic concern is not direct invasion but a loss of loyalty by border
inhabitants to the very concept of a national Mexico; see, for example, the
quotation from Guillermina Valdes-Villalva at the beginning of this chapter. 
Antonio Gonzalez de Leon expresses uneasiness about interdependence at the U.S.
border with the United States, about a binational economy, or symbiosis.  This
is another manifestation of unequal power.  Mexico, the weaker country, while
granting that there is a binational economy at the border -- the Mexican
incentives for the maquiladora demonstrate this acceptance -- does so with
misgiving and concern.  The stronger country, the United States, deals with the
binational economy primarily on economic grounds, but also out of a desire to
avoid mass migration north.  These different sensitivities, like the disparate
histories, are part of the backdrop to understanding the separate viewpoints at
the border. 
   The growth of a large Spanish-speaking population in the U.S. border region,
with its own agenda on international affairs, influences the U.S. government. 
While the loss of sovereignty is not an issue -- indeed, the inevitable growth of
domestic political power by Hispanic groups constitutes an affirmation of U.S.
sovereignty -- the Hispanic groups in the U.S. Southwest bemoan their alienation
from Washington, D.C., and even from their own state capitals.  The response,
however, is to organize in order to influence U.S. and state policy rather than
to look to Mexico.  U.S. border concerns also deal with specific issues, such as
air and water quality and hazardous waste disposal, which will be discussed later
in the chapter.
   Before going further, it is necessary to define what is meant by the border. 
Most  allusions to the border will refer to those cities and counties on both
sides that abut the other country, but this is not a rigid definition since San
Diego, which is treated as a border city, is not directly on the border.  The
border presents itself as a series of twin cities, one in each country (see table
8.1), and these twin cities, each supporting the other to a greater or lesser
degree, are the very essence of symbiosis.  The totals at the bottom of table 8.1
for border cities and counties reflect the definition of the border as used in this
chapter.
                                 Economics
   Mexican actions to stimulate the border economy have always had political
and social objectives as well.  Jesus Tamayo has pointed out that the first free
zone established on the Mexican side of the border in 1861 was designed to keep
the locals from emigrating to Texas.  The border-study program of the Centro
de Investigacion y Docencia Economicas (Cide), one of Mexico's leading research-
teaching institutions, was stimulated by unease over the region's increasing
economic integration with the United States and the loss of legitimacy of the
official party.  
   Mexican border programs were designed to stimulate employment. 
Commentators have made a connection between  U.S. termination in 1964 of the
bracero program, under which Mexicans had been contracted for farm work in
the United States, and the start of border programs to provide work for the
returning Mexicans, but while undoubtedly a consideration, there already existed
a desire to stimulate border employment irrespective of migration to the United
States.   A criticism often lodged against the border industrialization program
is that it attracts immigrants to the region who then continue their journey
across the border.  The evidence for this sequence -- of persons coming to the
border to get a job in the maquiladora only to end up in the United States -- is
not strong, although it cannot be rejected completely.  However, the criticism
misses the point.  The Mexican authorities have always had two related
objectives in mind, first to populate the border and to find jobs for persons
there.  
   Border development programs have had intended and unintended consequences. 
They did help populate the region and provide much employment, but they also
served to integrate the border more closely with the United States.  The                      Table 8.1  Population of U.S. and Mexican
                                Border Cities, 1980
                   (Population figures in thousands of persons)

US City             Mexican City            Population 1980    Percent Growth 1950-1980

                                         US City    Mex City     US City     Mex City
California          Baja California
 San Diego/          Tijuana              1,008       430            171       616
  Chula Vista
  Calexico           Mexicali                14       342            124       429
Arizona              Sonora
 Yuma/San Luis       San Luis                43        77            374     1,780
 Nogales             Nogales                 16        66            155       168
 Douglas             Agua Prieta             13        29             38       176
New Mexico          Chihuahua
 Columbus            Palomas                 -          2             -        199
Texas
 El Paso             Cd. Juarez             425       544            226       296
 Presidio            Ojinaga                  2        18             -        298
                    Coahuila
 Del Rio             Cd. Acun~a              30        39            111       242
 Eagle Pass          Piedras Negras          21        69            194       145
                    Tamualipas
 Laredo              Nuevo Laredo            91       202             76       250
 Rio Grande City     Camargo                  9        16            124       -38   
 Hidalgo/McAllen     Reynosa                 69       195            242       471
 Brownsville         Matamoros               85       189            136       312

TOTALS                                      US      Mexico

Border cities                             1,819     2,199            113       171
Border counties                           4,042     2,890            178       253
Border states                            41,918     8,1791           113       355
Full Country                            226,546    69,393             50       153

Sources:  Based on tables prepared by Jerry R. Ladman, "Industry on the
          Southern Border of the United States," pp. 206-207, from U.S.
          Census Bureau, U.S. Census of the Population, 1950 and 1980;
          Mexico, Secretaria de Economia, Censo general de poblacion,
          1950 and Inegi, Censo general de poblacion y vivienda, 1980.

Totals may not add due to rounding.
- :Less than 500.

1Excludes Mexican state of Nuevo Leon, which abuts the border at Texas, but
  whose border population is negligible.  However, its main city, Monterrey,
  while not at the border, does have many border-city attributes.


 
            
Mexican authorities thus face an intractable dilemma: continued job creation has
become essential to maintain loyalty to the official party and to Mexico itself,
but the more these jobs are integrated into the industrial production system of
the United States, the more loyalty to Mexico City diminishes.  The Mexican
political authorities cannot terminate the industrial integration with the United
States, since that is the basis of border development, but they must
simultaneously seek ways to increase the industrial integration of the border
with Mexico as a whole.
   If one measures the increase in the number of plants, their employment, and
the exports they have generated since the incentives that led to the maquiladora
program were instituted in 1965, the maquiladora must be judged a success (table
8.2).  The maquiladora are plants using Mexican labor to assemble or transform
materials sent mostly from the United States for later export, generally back to
the United States.  The growth of the maquiladora derives from a number of
considerations, and while proximity to the United States plays a role, it is not
the only one.  On the U.S. side, most of the plants supplying inputs to the
maquiladora are located elsewhere in the United States, particularly in the
midwest.  Transportation costs are therefore not the major attraction for many
products assembled in maquiladora.
   Peso devaluation has been a major stimulus to maquiladora growth; since 1983,
this devaluation sharply reduced the dollar cost of Mexican workers paid in
pesos.  A Mexican analyst has calculated that U.S. salaries for comparable work
were 4.7 times those of Mexican maquiladora workers in 1975, 5.6 times in 1980,
and 14 times in 1983.  The exchange-rate relationship made Mexico one of the
cheapest places in the world for an American corporation to hire foreign labor.
                   Table 8.2   Number, Employment, and Exports of
                       Mexican Maquiladora Plants, 1965-1987


Year          Number of             Total           Net exports2
               plants           employment1         ($ million)

1965            12                 3,000                   3
1970           120                20,327                  83
1975           454                67,213                 332
1980           578               119,546                 772
1981           605               130,973                 976
1982           585               127,049                 851
1983           600               150,867                 818
1984           722               202,078               1,155
1985           789               217,544               1,268
1986           844               242,234               1,285
1987         1,432               325,000               1,577

Sources:  Export data:  Banco de Mexico, Indicadores economicos.
          Other data:  1984-1986, El mercado de valores, October
          27, 1986, p. 1010; 1980-1984, Inegi, Boletin mensual de
          informacion economica, various issues; 1965-1979, Comercio
          exterior, vol. 33, no. 1 (January 1983), p. 148; El
          Tiempo, February 7, 1988; and press release of Mexico's
          National Commission on Foreign Investment on activities
          in 1987.

1The border industrialization program began in 1965.                          
2Figures reflect value added in Mexico.


   The growth of the maquiladora also reflects a tacit agreement between the
two countries.  Mexico instituted and then augmented incentives for foreign
firms to locate in Mexico in their production-sharing arrangements.  These
benefits include: the ability to import materials in bond (that is, without payment
of duty) on the basis that they will later be exported after Mexican value has
been added; permission to import machinery, equipment, replacement parts, and
tools free of duty; general exemption from the Mexican limitation on 49 percent
foreign ownership; unlimited-entry business visas for foreign plant managers; and
eased regulations for land use and acquisition.  Maquiladora, because of the
way they operate, generate costs rather than profits in Mexico and hence pay
little or no corporate income tax there.  Maquiladora plants were limited to the
border until 1972; about 90 percent of these plants were still at the border in
1987.   
   The U.S. part of this unwritten agreement was to permit the 806.30/807.00
system, under which import duties are liable only on the value added abroad, to
continue.  Other than this, the official U.S. role has been mostly passive. 
This passivity has been controversial among labor unions whose members produce
products that compete with those exported by the maquiladora, but it is
uncertain whether the maquila plants actually deprive U.S. workers of jobs by
encouraging runaway industries.   The reverse may be true -- U.S. industries
may survive by providing inputs to maquila plants.  The survival argument was
put as follows by two U.S. analysts of maquiladora-type production sharing: 
"...in many of the industries in which import penetration has been most
pronounced and trade policy most highly charged with political pressures --
sectors such as apparel, electronics, and automobiles -- firms have reorganized
their operations to use assembly abroad as an integral part of their strategy for
survival."
   While some Mexicans argue for drastic revision or abolition of the
maquiladora operation, the Mexican authorities have never taken the abolition
option seriously.  There are too many jobs involved, too much foreign
exchange earned, and too much at stake politically to alienate the border
population from the government in the Federal District.  However, few Mexicans
are fully satisfied with the operations of the maquiladora.  Their concerns fall
into five categories: the lack of integration of the maquila plants into the
Mexican economy; their vulnerability to changes in the Mexican exchange rate
and the health of the U.S. economy; their exploitative nature, especially
regarding women workers; the failure to provide meaningful skills to Mexicans;
and the tendency to exaggerate foreign-exchange earnings, since much that is
earned is spent for consumption goods and services on the U.S. side of the
border.
   The principal shortcoming of the maquiladora industry is that while located
within Mexico, the only thing Mexican about it is labor.  The Mexican share of
the value of material inputs, the merchandise for processing and the packaging,
has averaged only 1.3 percent in recent years.  The total valued added in
Mexico, based on U.S. duty assessment under 806.30/807.00, has ranged between
45 and 50 percent since 1983 composed primarily of labor costs, but also
electricity, other utilities, and local transportation.  
   Enclave activities of foreign corporations in developing countries have a long
and generally turbulent history.  The most frequent examples have been large
mining projects, which have generated conflicts in a number of Latin American
countries.  Mining involves the foreign exploitation of a country's natural
resources -- its patrimony, as it is often phrased in Latin America -- but it does
resemble the maquiladora in limiting benefits to the developing country to
employment and foreign-exchange earnings from direct exports.
   In Mexico, as in other countries, the backward linkage in manufacturing, that
is, developing supplier industries, was often facilitated by domestic-content
provisions forcing foreign investors to use increasing proportions of local
products.  But domestic-content provisions do not apply to maquiladora. 
Producers are happy because they are not limited in their sources, but the
situation also means their support is generally limited to workers in their plants
and government officials interested in the generation of foreign exchange.
   In part, the enclave nature of maquiladora is made necessary by the
underlying philosophy of U.S. tariff items 806.30/807.00.  The duty exemption for
U.S. components in item 806.30 refers to U.S. metal materials "exported for
further processing" and in 807.00 to "articles assembled abroad in whole or in
part of fabricated components, the product of the United States."  However,
there is nothing under either item that limits Mexican materials to 1.3 percent
of total material inputs and, in fact, other countries have generally surpassed
this percentage. 
    Why has Mexico not done so?  The reasons are varied.  One is that the
border nature of most of the maquiladora limits integration with the rest of
Mexico, at least with the major manufacturing areas of Mexico City and
Guadalajara, because of distance and inadequate transportation facilities. 
Monterrey, Mexico's second largest manufacturing center, is distant from Ciudad
Juarez, Tijuana, and Mexicali, which are the three leading locations for maquila
plants.  However, since many goods move long distances in other countries,
distance alone is an inadequate explanation for lack of integration.  Another
reason for the lack of Mexican inputs is that most maquiladora are owned and
operated by U.S. companies, which have transferred the labor-intensive portions
of operations out of the United States.  Foreign companies (increasingly
Japanese as well as U.S.) have little incentive to seek out Mexican inputs unless
there is some palpable price or quality advantage.
   For those who believe in the market and the salience of comparative
advantage, the maquiladora are seen not only as a success story but as the wave
of the future.  This sharing of production exploits the abundant factor of each
country, the capital and production processes of the United States and the labor
of Mexico, in a least-cost combination.  Foreign-exchange earnings from
maquiladora are roughly equal to those from tourism, which is evidence of
success.  Yet, because they are not integrated into the Mexican economy, these
plants remain a fragile base on which to build an industrial structure.  The
major fault may be Mexico's; other countries have integrated assembly into the
framework of national production.  A common recommendation of Mexican
analysts is to force the use of more national products in the assembly plants. 
Other recommendations frequently made are to give credit and other incentives
for Mexican investment in maquiladora, perhaps through joint ventures, and
increased benefits for plant location away from the border, particularly at ports.
One attempt to better integrate the maquiladora allows them, particularly if their
products are not competitive with other production in Mexico, to sell up to 20
percent of output within Mexico.  The main purpose of this feature is to
encourage potential Mexican intermediate goods industries.  The main motive for
permitting in-bond plants to locate away from the border is to integrate them
into the Mexican economy.
     Another main source of concern over maquiladora is their double
dependence on circumstances not within Mexican control.  Since most such plants
are part of the production processes of U.S. companies, their expansion depends
on the state of the U.S. economy.  Equally crucial is the need for Mexican labor
costs (or, more strictly, unit costs, combining wage costs and productivity) to be
lower than in other areas in which assembly plants can be located, such as the
Caribbean or Asia.  The most important contributor to low Mexican wages in
recent years has been the depreciating peso and perpetuation of this situation
merely to maintain assembly plants is hardly a viable policy. 
   The harshest criticism of the maquiladora system is that it is based on the
exploitation of Mexican labor.  The low wages based on a depreciated peso are
only one aspect of this exploitation charge.  The more severe accusation is that
the plants deliberately use women because of their docility; and that poor
working conditions foster high labor turnover and leave the former employees
with little skills for future earnings.  
   Women make up 80 to 90 percent of the work force of assembly  operations
like the maquiladora not just in Mexico, but in all countries.  There are many
reasons for female dominance: greater tractability of females than of males in
the societies of most developing countries and, hence, less of a tendency to
unionize; lower wages than males; and greater female availability, particularly in
view of the large turnover in these plants.  
   The annual turnover is 30 percent.  Guillermina Valdes-Villalva found that
in the 1982-1983 period, only 12.9 percent of those who left maquila jobs found
second jobs elsewhere in the maquila industry, and Jorge Carrillo, in a well-
documented article focusing on the labor experience in maquiladora in three
cities, Tijuana, Ciudad Juarez, and Matamoros, found that employee rotation was
a permanent feature even in plants long in existence.   These three cities in
1984 had almost 60 percent of all border maquiladora plants and 65 percent of
employment.  Length of employment varied slightly by city and by the nature of
the job (worker, technician, or in administration), but the general pattern was
between two-and-one-half and three years.  The principal cause of turnover until
1981 was dismissal by the employer, but there is evidence that employee
initiative to leave a job has since become more frequent. 
   The issue of exploitation of young women (Valdes-Villalva notes that the
average age of female maquila workers in 1982-1983 was 22) is controversial. 
Observers have cited such conditions as boring jobs under sexist management,
poor work conditions, repetitive work, with few breaks and little conversation as
hardships maquiladora workers must bear.   But it is possible that these
observers bring their own middle-class sense of values to the analysis of
exploitation.  The young women do seek the jobs, presumably after learning
something about working conditions through word of mouth.  Two U.S.
investigators interviewed 497 female workers under controlled conditions free of
management interference at two coupon-sorting plants in Ciudad Juarez and the
general conclusion of a majority of those interviewed (between 52 and 53
percent) was that the environment was pleasant, the job not filled with pressure,
and the training adequate.
   The female domination of maquiladora employment has been criticized by both
Mexican and U.S. observers as being counterproductive, attracting persons who
would not otherwise be in the labor force through the lure of pocket money
while doing nothing for the male majority of Mexico's working population.  But
the conclusion that young women would not enter the work force if not for the
maquiladora has been challenged.  A U.S. investigator has demonstrated that
female unemployment in Mexico is already higher than for males and concludes:
"There is no reason to assume that most women are merely working to pass time
while they wait for a husband to come along.  A more plausible explanation is
that they work out of financial necessity." 
   Of all the issues surrounding the maquiladora, none is more loaded with
emotion than the recruitment of young women, many of whom are entering the
labor force for the first time, to do simple, repetitive tasks.  Those who
criticize the structure seek to evoke memories of female-dominated sweat shops
once familiar in the United States and other developed countries.  The contrary
argument is that working conditions are not adverse and that wages, while low
by U.S. standards, are not by Mexican standards.  If the wages were
substantially higher, approximating those in the United States, the outcome would
undoubtedly be the loss of most of the plants to other platform nations.
   The assembly work in maquila plants must be tailored to persons with modest
educations.  In Fernandez-Kelly's sample, 5 percent of the workers had less than
six years of schooling, 55 percent had six years, and 40 percent had between
seven and eleven years.  The precise skills imparted, therefore, are those
suitable primarily for other assembly operations.  There is a familiar vicious
circle: the repetitive nature of most of the chores is a factor in the high
turnover; and the high turnover requires that the individual tasks must be kept
simple to minimize training time.
   However, some work habits that are obtained may be transferrable to other
jobs.  There is also some technology transfer from the maquiladora. 
Administrative and technical personnel are trained.  The techniques for
organizing processing operations are transmitted to those Mexicans in
management positions.  The proportion of males is increasing.   Still, the
argument that the maquiladora represent a useful stage in the industrialization of
Mexico cannot be pushed too far.  Their enclave, captive nature, high turnover
rates, and production techniques designed for persons with modest educations,
have limited industrial value for Mexico as a whole.  Unless the maquiladora are
better integrated into the Mexican production process, their main value will
continue to be the provision of employment and the generation of foreign
exchange.
   Employment in the maquiladora is substantial, but must be kept in perspective. 
The 325,000 employment figure for 1987 is about one-third of the annual
additions to Mexico's total labor force.  The size of the labor force in Mexico is
about 27 million and maquiladora employment therefore constitutes only 1 percent
of the total, significant for the border but marginal for Mexico as a whole.  
   From time to time Mexicans are critical of the balance-of-payments drain at
the border resulting from personal purchases on the U.S. side.  This is often
translated to mean that the earnings from maquiladora exports are overstated
since the workers leave much of their wages with merchants on the U.S. side. 
While factually accurate, the argument is superficial.  Mexicans who live on the
border can hardly be criticized for taking advantage of purchasing opportunities
on the other side, especially when an overvalued peso provided an incentive to
do this -- and this is the case whether earnings come from maquiladora or other
work.  Cross-border purchases take place in both directions and are another
manifestation of the fact that the border is a line of sovereignty, not necessarily
one of economic or social rationality.  
   The maquiladora have been oversold and overdenounced on both sides of the
border.  The overselling comes from those who depict these plants as the wave
of the future, as the ideal way to facilitate production sharing between the two
countries.  Maquiladora are efficient production-sharing arrangements which
provide benefits to U.S. producers and to the Mexican workers and Mexico's
foreign-exchange earnings, but they are a fragile base on which to industrialize
since their continuation, let alone their future growth, depends so heavily on
relative wage and unit costs in Mexico compared with other locations.
   The overdenunciation also takes place on the U.S. side of the border.  U.S.
labor unions argue against maquiladora on the grounds of keeping jobs at home,
but their case is a narrow one.  The issue is not really the Mexican location for
labor-intensive operations, but rather the choice between the U.S. and any
foreign location.  If the 806.30/807.00 facility were removed and import duties
had to be paid on the total value of imports (the U.S.-produced portion plus the
foreign value added), one would then have to look at each product to determine
whether total production would best be done in the United States or abroad.  In
separate studies in 1970 and 1988, the U.S. International Trade Commission
concluded that U.S. labor would probably lose employment opportunities if the
806.30/807.00 system were terminated because many operations would move totally
abroad.  If the economics of production led in this direction, maintenance of
jobs in the United States would then require import restrictions.  In the case of
textiles and apparel, shipments from maquiladora plants are already restricted by
U.S. import quotas.  The loss of the 807.00 feature would almost certainly lead
to complete production of many other products outside the United States and
make them targets for quota limitations similar to those now in existence for
textiles and apparel.
   The U.S. critics of the maquiladora also tend to neglect the benefits to U.S.
border cities.  Econometric measurement shows that the maquiladora have a
significant impact on increasing both employment and sales in the U.S. border
cities.  If 806.30/807.00 benefits were removed, the U.S. border cities would be
penalized even if employment were increased elsewhere in the United States --
and the latter is, at best, uncertain.  
   The critics of the maquiladora, both Mexican and American, tend to downplay
both the employment and balance-of-payments importance of these operations. 
For while maquiladora employment is modest in the total Mexican employment
picture, it has become crucial to the border area, and the foreign-exchange
earnings are an important element in Mexico's ability to service its foreign debt. 
Neither of these considerations can be ignored by the Mexican government, nor
should they be by the U.S. government.
                            Cultural and Living Habits
   There has been a maturation in writings about the border, progressing from
condescension to greater understanding.  Discussions from the centers in both
countries as recent as the early 1980s tended to depict the border disparagingly,
as having an inferior, mongrel society, neither Mexican nor American.  Americans
have had a tendency to look down on Mexicans and on Mexican Americans as
well.  Anglos use derogatory terms to describe Mexicans and persons of Mexican
origin -- greaser, for example.  Racist language reflects cultural conditioning,
and unfortunately, such attitudes have also manifested themselves in official U.S.
behavior, although this is beginning to change for the better; another "operation
wetback," a paramilitary operation launched in 1954 to round up and then carry
out mass deportations of suspected undocumented Mexican aliens, is not likely. 
Still, old habits persist; in February 1985, the United States expressed displeasure
over Mexican drug-enforcement behavior by deliberate slowing down border
crossings; an inferior is dealt with by punishment.
   Writings coming from Mexico City have long reflected a patronizing view of
border residents; Mexican Americans are referred to as pochos (persons who
speak neither Spanish nor English, but a mixture) and Americans as gringos (the
word is derogatory when used in Mexico).  The attitude was expressed clearly in
1978 by Carlos Monsivais, an intellectual of substantial reputation in Mexico:
"The border Mexican learns from his daily contact with American reality; he has
come full circle, from a position of chauvinistic defiance to one of wallowing in
'the Mexican's inferiority complex.'"  Monsivais saw "capitalist ideology" and
American status symbols becoming real at the same time that an "indigenous
recess" is maintained.     Castellanos and Lopez y Rivas have deplored U.S. influence on the Mexican
language, values, consumption, aspirations, living habits, and social mores; they
argue that it devalues the "national" culture of Mexican border residents. 
What such analyses reveal is precisely the inferiority complex to which Monsivais
referred, but it resides not with border residents, but with the critics themselves
in Mexico City.  The argument that national culture is being lost assumes a
contest of cultures, a zero-sum game which the Americans are winning, but what
is occurring is more subtle: two cultures are meeting and the outcome is a
melding of two quite different traditions.  Whether the mixture is better or
worse than the separate cultures is indefinable; it depends on the values brought
to the assessment.  
  Ideology at the border is probably more capitalistic, to use Monsivais's word,
than in most of Mexico, if by that he means the dominance of private initiative,
but this does not prevent Mexican border entrepreneurs from looking to Mexico
City for favors.  They have been so conditioned by the PRI.  Perhaps the most
capitalistic of cities in Mexico in terms of ideology is Monterrey and its location
near the border has much to do with this.  
   Culture at the border is conditioned by national heritage, education,
economics, cross-border kinships, and the daily interaction that comes from
proximity.  Habits at the border are more binational than elsewhere in the two
countries.  The music is both rock and Latin; the diet is both tacos and
hamburgers.  William Murray points out that on Halloween children in Tijuana
don costumes and go triquitriqui; but he fails to note that they are also
conscious of the day of the dead.
   Border culture is distinct from national cultures, but it is not uniform on
both sides of the border; habits of thought are different in Laredo and Nuevo
Laredo because the conditioning factors are different.  Cultural patterns are also
not the same in Tijuana as at the other end of the border in Matamoros, any
more than San Diego and Brownsville have identical cultures.  Again, the
formative features vary.     
     The purpose here is not to enter into a lengthy discussion of differences in
Mexican and U.S. mores or to define the precise nature of the cultural mixture
at various locations on both sides of the border.  It is, rather, to highlight a
phenomenon understood at the border but little noticed elsewhere.  What occurs
there directly affects millions of persons and indirectly impinges on what in the
capitals is considered to be high policy.  When the U.S. authorities slow down
border crossings, as they do from time to time to send some sort of message to
Mexico, the unscrambling device delivers something at the other end that is
incomprehensible.  The intention is to express dissatisfaction over some Mexican
action or lack of action (say, on drug control); the result is to damage U.S.
commerce and prevent cross-border cultural interaction.  And the authorities in
Washington repeatedly ignore the simple fact that El Paso is as reliant on Ciudad
Juarez as the reverse.  The Mexicans come across to work in the homes in
Nogales, to shop in Laredo, and to hold down a variety of jobs in McAllen.  The
Americans go across to shop, manage maquiladora plants, and to work out mutual
problems relating to medical care, criminal justice, and fire services.
   This constant interaction is superimposed on underlying cultural patterns and
social mores.  Those officials responsible for managing border cities must provide
necessary services; they do not have the luxury of disdaining foreigners. Cross-
border relations involve serious disputes -- for example, over environmental
issues -- as well as cooperation, and these problems cannot be resolved by
nationalistic posturing.
   When one speaks to border residents, there is a common theme of cultural
distance from the two capitals.  The patronizing from both Washington, D.C. and
Mexico City is met by hostility.  The Mexican norte~nos at the border mock the
chilangos who come from Mexico City.  Yet, attitudes are evolving; border
studies have flourished in recent years.  The Centro de Estudios Fronterizos del
Norte de Mexico (the Center for the Study of Mexico's Northern Frontier) in
Tijuana became a full-fledged university, El Colegio de la Frontera Norte, in
February 1986.  Associations of border scholars have been formed in the United
States to do research on a variety of issues, from economics to culture, from the
environment to health services.  The U.S.-Mexico Border Health Association
publishes a bilingual quarterly journal (Border Health - Salud Fronteriza).  The
1986 USITC study of the border seriously attempted to set forth options for
improving the economy on the U.S. side.
   Those Mexicans who write about cultural alienation of border residents from
their national heritage have a legitimate concern.  The solution they offer of
greater economic and political integration of the border into Mexico is similarly
reasonable.  But this will not alter the basic fact that the border culture and
living habits of border residents will be different from those elsewhere in the
country.  The border manifests in acute form what is evident about U.S.-Mexico
relations generally, that whether one calls it symbiosis, mutual dependency,
integration, or cooperation, each side relies on the other for its well-being.  

                                     Politics
   Monsivais is undoubtedly correct that a capitalist ideology is more deep-
seated at the border than in Mexico City.  The maquiladora contribute to this,
but they are by no means the only reason for the economic orientation of
Mexican border residents.  Mexicans at the border are bombarded daily by U.S.
radio and television.  They visit the other side, shop in the stores, work in a
variety of activities, and speak regularly with persons living in the United
States.  Their consumption habits are formed both by what is available in Mexico
and what they can purchase in the United States.   Mexican commentators
deplore the situation for stimulating a drain of foreign exchange to maintain
consumption patterns suitable for Americans with higher incomes but not for
Mexicans.  Nevertheless, Mexican authorities have learned that they cannot
decide by decree, or by the importunings of economists and social commentators,
how their border nationals should spend their money.  One example of this
recognition was the articulos gancho  program under which U.S. goods were
offered for sale in Mexican stores at competitive prices.
   One of the problems that has perennially beset efforts at cross-border
cooperation among mayors of twin cities or governors of border states is that
authority in Mexico is more centralized than in the United States.  Mexican
authorities have fewer locally-generated revenues; they are more constrained in
actions they can take independently of the distant federal government.   
   Salas-Porras, a Mexican analyst, has noted that the urbanization of the
border has created employment for technicians, engineers, administrators,
lawyers, and other professionals who comprise a group of trained persons able
and prepared to make independent decisions.  The growth of the maquiladora
has just added to this cadre of Mexican professionals in constant contact with
U.S. counterparts, usually on technical issues.
   This combination -- the economic interaction, the substantive distance from
Mexico City, the technical consultations among professionals, the cultural
penetration -- has made the northern frontier more ideologically conservative
than either the political hierarchy or the bureaucracy in Mexico City.  It is not
known, because unregulated tests are not regularly permitted, how the northern
states would vote in free elections, whether the PRI would continue to capture
all the governorships and the overwhelming majority of mayoralties in cities. 
What is known is that conservative, anti-PRI sentiment is strong on the border.
   Opinion surveys also consistently show that border residents have a more
favorable view of the United States than persons living in Mexico City.  Those
who live on the border are more likely to accept the need for economic
cooperation with the United States than persons polled in Mexico City.
   The deficiencies of Mexico's qualified democracy have become an issue of
greater moment at the border than in the interior of the country.  The point
should not be pushed too far because the main decisions on the political system
are made in the center and not the periphery.  Nevertheless, it was the
periphery that attracted most attention during elections in 1986 and 1987 and
this clamor has had durable reverberations in the center.  

                                    Environment
   The Chilean economist Anibal Pinto commented some years ago that the
Economic Commission for Latin America, with which he was affiliated and which
for many years was influential in shaping development policy in the region,
neglected environmental issues.  This shortcoming still characterizes analyses
and suggestions of those who approach development issues from an economic-
political viewpoint.
   But environmental survival is the most critical border issue of all.  The
effectiveness of the maquiladora in promoting Mexican industrialization and
employment, or whether the language of Mexican and Mexican-American border
residents is replete with Spanglish, or even the extent to which Mexican border
residents look to the United States as opposed to Mexico as the basis for their
economic future, all pale by comparison.
   The most significant issue in southwestern United States and Northern Mexico
is the quantity and quality of the water.  It serves little purpose to raise income
levels in Agua Prieta (in the Mexican state of Sonora) if pollution from copper
smelters on both sides of the border curtail life expectancy.  The high rate of
infant mortality in Nuevo Laredo --42.1 per thousand compared with 8 per
thousand in infants up to one year across the border in Laredo -- is caused
mostly by preventable diseases resulting from inadequate water and food
treatment, combined with poverty.  
   Environmental issues are fields unto themselves which cannot be covered
adequately here.  Yet, no discussion of the border would be complete without
examining them.  Beyond their intrinsic importance, they shape much of the give
and take among authorities along the border and even the negotiations between
the two federal governments.  Environmental conflicts have been among the most
vituperative between two countries and also among the most rewarding in terms
of cooperation.  Let us briefly discuss three major environmental areas:  water,
air, and hazardous waste. 
   Apportionment of the waters of the principal rivers, the Rio Grande and the
Colorado, has been accomplished under two treaties, of 1906 and 1944.  Albert
Utton, a U.S. water expert, has written: "By and large, we can give a good
report on the apportionment of the surface flows shared by Mexico and the
United States.  The two countries have been able to agree amicably on the
division of the major rivers, leaving only the minor rivers unapportioned." 
According to Utton, the main unresolved problem relating to sharing the quantity
of surface water is what to do in the event of an extraordinary drought or
serious accident.  Utton argues that since surface water is fully appropriated,
the task for the future as populations continue to increase is to institute better
conservation measures by setting priorities among water uses that would allow
gradual retirement of water-intensive agricultural production in favor of
municipal and industrial needs, for example.  
   The institution for carrying out the 1944 water treaty is the International
Boundary and Water Commission, described by one observer as being "...as
remarkable a regional water management agency as can be found anywhere." 
Its predecessor, the International Boundary Commission, was established in 1889;
the IBC was joined with the International Water Commission in 1932 to form the
IBWC.  The IBWC has a Mexican and an American section, each headed by a
commissioner and staff.  Each side pays its own expenses and accords diplomatic
status and free movement in its territory to personnel of the other.    The
Commission carries out important work, almost completely without publicity,
largely divorced from the political conflicts that otherwise beset the interaction
between the two nations and has demonstrated that it is possible to have fruitful
cooperation on a technical level between the two countries.  However, many
issues are political and most of these are beyond the scope of the IBWC,
including increasingly important groundwater and wastewater issues. 
   Water-pollution and sewage problems required solutions at the political level,
following which the IBWC was given responsibility for the administration of
agreements that were reached.  Political procedures were outlined by an August
1983 agreement, which deals with cooperation for the protection and improvement
of the environment in the border area.  Each country has appointed a national
coordinator, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) in the United States and
the Secretariat of Urban Development and Ecology (SEDUE) in Mexico, and the
overall framework agreement is carried out through sub-agreements negotiated
between the two countries.  Thus far these have included border sanitation, air
pollution, and hazardous waste disposal and transportation, but the cooperation
need not be limited to these subjects.  The agreement calls for a minimum of
one high-level meeting a year, but the technical nature of the issues involved
requires more frequent meetings of experts.  Both the Tijuana sewage and New
River agreements discussed below grew out of this framework.
   Unlike surface-water allocations, water-quality issues are still controversial 
and neither side has a pure record.  Mumme  has documented U.S.
procrastination in dealing with the problem of excessive salinity in the Colorado
River as it leaves the United States and enters Mexico, suggesting that in this
case the United States has treated Mexico as an inferior.
   The water of the Colorado River supplies the needs of 15 million people in
southwestern United States and the Mexicali valley of northwestern Mexico. 
Following construction of the Wellton-Mohawk project in Arizona in 1961, the
salinity of the Colorado River rose to unacceptable levels in Mexico, destroying
an estimated 7,000 acres and forcing some 500 farmers a year to abandon their
land.  The supposed permanent solution to this problem was not reached until
1973, when minute 242 of the IBWC was signed.  The main feature of the
agreement was a U.S. commitment to build a desalting plant near Yuma, Arizona,
and a canal to carry off the brine. Each country committed itself to consult with
the other before undertaking new water  developments that might affect the
other.  But it is not clear that the desalting plant will fully solve the Mexican
problem; the Imperial Dam, where water is stored, now has its own salt problem. Just as the United States can be faulted for inordinate delays in dealing with
the saline content of the Colorado River water provided to Mexico, so can
Mexico be faulted for contaminating waters in the United States by its waste-
disposal methods and inadequate sewage treatment.  The greatest concerns
regarding surface water quality exist in the Rio Grande and Tia Juana River
valleys.  The Rio Grande is being polluted by the increasing discharge of
wastewater into the river from the growing population on both sides of the
border.  Sewage disposal and associated water pollution problems resulting from
inadequate treatment have become a major irritant in relations between the two
countries.
   The sewage problem attracting the most attention has been in Tijuana.  Parts
of the city have no sewer service and waste water runs downhill across the
border into the Tia Juana River valley and from the river into the Pacific Ocean. 
The resulting high bacteria count often forces beaches on the U.S. side to close.
The problem was the subject of numerous meetings over many years, both at the
local level and between authorities of the two federal governments, and came to
a head in 1984, when Mexico applied for a loan from the Inter-American
Development Bank to expand the water supply and distribution system and double
the capacity of Tijuana's sewage collection.  A July 1985 agreement under which
Mexico committed itself to construct, in stages, a large-scale treatment system
for municipal wastewater in Tijuana should eventually alleviate the problem. 
The monitoring of this agreement will take place through the IBWC.
   One other pollution problem which received extensive publicity was that of
the New River.  This river rises in Mexico, near Mexicali, and flows northward
into California to the Salton Sea, southeast of Palm Springs.  Its contamination,
from both inadequately treated sewage and industrial discharges, had long been
the subject of despair on both sides of the border, but especially in the United
States.  The problem was publicized nationally in the United States on the
television program 60 Minutes on December 28, 1986.  Shortly before that
program (and possibly because it was known that the program was being
prepared), in September 1986, the two countries agreed to cooperate, through the
IBWC, to improve water quality in the New River. 
   Among the causes of the New River pollution alleged on the 60 Minutes
program were discharges by maquiladora on the Mexican side and waste disposal
in Mexico by companies operating on the U.S. side.  The implications were that
production in Mexico granted the freedom to pollute and that less strict waste-
disposal standards led U.S. companies to carry their garbage into Mexico.    
   Other water-pollution problems arise elsewhere along the border.  Some have
been corrected, such as that of the San Pedro River which flows north from
Sonora into southeastern Arizona, while others remain to be addressed, such as
at Nuevo Laredo.
   The most critical unresolved water issue is the utilization rate and potential
contamination of groundwater.  The IBWC, with minimum legal authority in this
field, has made recommendations to deal with sanitation problems, but the broad
issue remains to be addressed.  One U.S. legal expert has pointed to the
inadequacies and differences among groundwater laws in the four U.S. border
states noting that "Each of the states has a different system of groundwater law;
none has adequate legislation or regulations for the protection and management
of diminishing supplies within the state and along the border area."  Beyond
this, as Utton points out, international competence over aquifers divided by the
frontier is largely undefined; he calls the legal and institutional situation
"chaotic."
   Groundwater provides about 40 percent of U.S. water for irrigation and 80
percent for all uses in U.S. rural areas.  The biggest users are the border states
and there is incontrovertible evidence that groundwater is being used faster than
it can be replenished.  An article in The Economist points out that parts of west
Texas above a depleted portion of the Ogallala aquifer are already dustbowls.
Excessive drawing from an aquifer can also lead to saturating the remaining
water with harmful salts, rendering it useless. Aquifers can also be contaminated
by seepage from fertilizers and pesticides, leaks from underground gasoline
storage tanks, and hazardous waste disposal.  As one expert has put it:
"Groundwaters store contamination, and the process is often irreversible."  The
data to determine the extent of groundwater contamination is generally lacking,
but the problem is real and growing in such areas as the twin-city area of El
Paso and Ciudad Juarez.  Groundwater is the chief source of water for human
consumption in the area and studies indicate that both cities are pumping at a
faster rate than the aquifer, the Hueco Bolson, is being recharged.  Because of
fear that the water will shortly be unfit for human consumption, El Paso filed in
1980 for permission to drill wells in the Mesilla Bolson in New Mexico, which
has thus far not been granted.  Mexico is obviously an interested party in this
interstate dispute in the United States.  
   The specialized literature, written by technicians and not by politicians given
to overstatement, is filled with calamitous predictions if remedial action is not
taken.  Expert recommendations cite the need to develop more complete
hydrological information, to practice conservation, establish allocation priorities,
and devise joint management of groundwaters intersected by the international
boundary.   Air-quality problems have existed for some time all along the border, but
experts cite three areas as most pressing: the San Diego-Tijuana complex; El
Paso-Ciudad Juarez; and the copper-smelting triangle of Cananea and Nacozari,
both in Sonora, and Douglas, Arizona.  These were the three areas initially
addressed by the air-quality working group of the border environmental
cooperation agreement.  Each of these has now become an issue of discussion
between the two federal governments under the 1983 La Paz agreement.
   One of the leading analysts of air-pollution problems along the border,
Howard Applegate, has referred to past treatment of the atmosphere as a classic
example of a common property resource, which "...belongs to no one, so
therefore belongs to everyone."  His recommendation is that the atmosphere be
treated as a public property resource, much in the manner of national forests
and grazing lands, thereby establishing the basis for entitlements; and to treat
the airshed as a single entity cutting across both nations.
   Finally, management of hazardous and toxic substances presents another set
of environmental issues that grow daily in complexity and importance.  The
regulatory framework is haphazard, varying among the border states in the
United States and uncontrolled by any overarching federal standards, and hardly
any regulation at all in Mexico.  Among the problems are the export to Mexico
of substances banned in the United States -- certain pesticides for example; the
shift to Mexico of operations with stringent safety standards in the United
States -- asbestos products are an example; and the actual dumping in Mexico of
wastes generated in the United States -- the earlier discussion of the pollution
of the New River noted one instance of this practice.  
   This set of problems has been approached thus far under the bilateral
environmental agreement mostly by discussion and the exchange of information. 
One issue of some consequence that has arisen in the La Paz framework is
Mexican opposition to ocean incineration of waste as practiced by the United
States.  
   There was a time, not much more than a decade ago, when U.S. businesses
considered it to be shrewd practice to move hazardous and polluting businesses
to developing countries as U.S. environmental standards became more strict.  The
tradeoff for the developing country was between income enhancement for some
and  environmental degradation for all.  This philosophy still prevails to some
extent, as is evident from the location of copper smelters, plants working with
lead and asbestos, and waste disposal practices of some U.S. companies in
Mexico.  It is clear at the border, however, that this export of pollution, beyond
the damage it does in Mexico, comes back to trouble the United States in such
forms as food contaminated by domestically prohibited pesticides or sulfur oxide
emissions from copper smelting in Mexico.
   It is too early to assess the full impact of the La Paz agreement, but it
represents a valuable step.  The two countries recognized the importance of the
environmental issue and made it high policy --perhaps not as high in their
thinking as drug traffic, but still of great importance.  The agreement provided a
method to deal with political issues as well as the technical aspects of
environmental issues that were within the purview of the IBWC.  By combining
federal coordination and working groups on local problems, some easing of the
different administrative systems of the two countries, highly centralized in
Mexico, less so in the United States, was made possible.  But most environmental
issues between the two countries remain unresolved, and the most crucial,
dealing with the use and contamination of groundwater, has hardly been dealt
with thus far, even within the two countries.
    What has been recognized, however, is that the two countries are linked,
that each one's garbage can make the other sick.  Viewed in historical context,
this is no small achievement.  The bilateral environmental agreement, whatever
its ultimate accomplishments, represents a shift in U.S. behavior from disdain to
discussion and negotiation.

Drugs
   Drug traffic is an example of proximity between countries creating problems. 
The United States is the world's largest market for illicit drugs and Mexico is
the most important conduit for drugs entering the United States, both those
produced in Mexico and others for which Mexico is a convenient transit point. 
The drug problem is important in its own right, but it also contaminates the
total bilateral relationship.  Some background on the extent of the Mexico-U.S.
drug trade is necessary to understand the reason for U.S. preoccupation.
   The most widely-used illegal drug is marijuana; an estimated 18.2 million
Americans, or 10 percent of the population over age 12, use it at least once a
month.  An estimated 5.8 million Americans use cocaine one or more times a
month and the number of heroin addicts is estimated at 500,000.  The Office of
Technology Assessment (OTA) conservatively estimated the retail value of
marijuana, cocaine, and heroin sold in the United States at $50 billion in 1985,
with marijuana totaling $16.8 billion; cocaine $20 billion; and heroin $13.8 billion.
   The Mexican connection varies among these three substances.  Mexico does
not produce the coca plant, the source for cocaine, which the DEA considers to
be the most serious problem because of its increasing use and damage to health.
(Physical quantities of cocaine entering the United States are estimated to have
doubled between 1981 and 1986.)  Rather, cocaine from South America destined
for the United States comes through Mexico.  The main export point is
Colombia, and but there is intelligence that transshipment through Mexico
increased following interdiction efforts in Florida and the Caribbean.
   Foreign countries provided between 10,000 and 15,000 metric tons of
marijuana to the U.S. in 1987, an estimated 80 percent of consumption.  The
main suppliers were Mexico and Colombia, who together provided about 95
percent of the total, each with about one third; other more modest suppliers
included Jamaica and Belize.  Mexican marijuana is produced mainly in
Chihuahua, Durango, and Sinaloa, and while the Bureau of International Narcotics
Matters (INM) of the U.S. Department of State has speculated that marijuana
growing increased in Mexico after the 1982 economic decline, eradication also
increased in 1987 (table 8.3).
   Marijuana is produced in the United States and many other countries and
potential sources of supply are limitless for all practical purposes.  Because of
its relatively low dollar/high quantity characteristic, marijuana is usually shipped
in bulk.   Imports enter the United States primarily on private ships and
aircraft.  However, marijuana from Mexico also enters in private vehicles and on
individuals. 
   Most heroin entering the United States is produced in Asia, but Mexico is
both a producer and a major transit point.   The INM estimated that close to
90 percent of the heroin consumed in the United States in 1977 originated in
Mexico, but that the percentage declined in the early 1980s to 30 percent due to
heroin eradication efforts, only to increase again to an unknown percentage by
now.  One reason for the increase given by INM was the attractiveness of opium
poppy cultivation in the declining economy.  Heroin traffic is highly organized
and, because it has a high value to low bulk ratio, can be carried into the 
                 Table 8.3  Mexico:  Estimates of Opium Poppy and
                  Marijuana Production and Exports, 1986 and 1987


                                       Opium Poppy               Marijuana
                                    1986        1987         1986       1987

Hectares:
  Cultivated                       6,0251      6,100        8,4301     9,000
  Eradicated                       2,380       4,160        2,970      7,200
  Harvested                        3,650       1,900        5,4601     l,800


Metric tons:
  Yield                            18-41        15          5,3201     1,745
  Produced (after loss factor)       2-42        1.52       4,6901     1,540
  Seized in Mexico                     0.12      n.a.         100        100
  Consumed in Mexico                   n.a.      n.a.         100        100
  Exported to the U.S.               2-42        1.52       5,0201     1,340


Mexican production as percent
  total non-U.S. production       1.3-1.6    0.7-1.2        43-45      26-35


Source:  U.S. Department of State, Bureau of International Narcotics Matters,
          "International Narcotics Control Strategy Report," March 1987.

     1Midpoints of ranges given in original source.  Figures for Mexico are not
consistent throughout original report.

     2Figures are for heroin.




United States in small shipments by individual couriers.  Table 8.3 provides data
compiled by INM on opium poppy and marijuana production in Mexico.                             Mexican-U.S. Cooperation
   The budget for the U.S. State Department international anti-narcotics program
totaled $118 million in U.S. fiscal year 1987; of this, $15.5 million was dedicated
to Mexico, the highest for any country.  As INM put it: "Mexico continues to be
the highest United States narcotics control priority...."
   The aerial-eradication program uses 89 aircraft under the direction of the
Mexican attorney general's office.  Five fixed-wing Turbo Thrushes are provided
by the United States, as are three Bell-212 and 15 Bell-206 helicopters equipped
for spraying and sometimes used to transport troops.  Table 8.3 provides U.S.
estimates of crop destruction from spraying.  In mid-1986, the DEA had 32
agents stationed in Mexico and 161 agents stationed in the United States along
the Mexican border.  The U.S. agents do not have the authority to make
arrests in Mexico, but they cooperate with Mexican counterparts in investigations
and provide evidence gathered in the United States for prosecutions pursued in
Mexico.  The U.S. Customs Service, the Coast Guard, and the Federal Bureau of
Investigation provide additional lines of defense within the United States.
   Perhaps the most basic question of the entire program centers on the long-
term value of crop-eradication programs.  Their effects can be neatly quantified
by hectares sprayed and tonnage of crops destroyed, but it is not self-evident
that any  eradication is durable.  Statements by U.S. authorities relating just to
Mexico are replete with admissions about the recrudescence of drug production
following earlier successes of crop eradication.  The main problem is that crop-
control and eradication programs must be pursued simultaneously in many
countries.  Peter Reuter has argued that U.S. drug-control efforts in foreign
countries have been unsuccessful, despite individual success stories, because oflimited options available to growers, lack of government control in many planting
areas, and, most important, the shifting set of drug producers in the world. 
Turkish opium, Mexican heroin, and Mexican marijuana production all declined
sharply at one time or another, but new sources repeatedly came on line, as did
new distribution systems. But this reasoning, even if accepted, does not
necessarily lead to the conclusion that production-control programs should be
abandoned; it does demonstrate, however, that demand-reduction measures are
necessary to durably curtail drug traffic.  This is the Mexican position -- that
while Mexico will pursue production-control and interdiction measures, the heart
of the correction rests with the United States.
   The stationing of a large number of DEA agents in Mexico is a vivid example
of bilateral cooperation that holds potential for friction.  The DEA agents work
cooperatively with their Mexican counterparts, and when a U.S. agent is killed or
abducted, it becomes an international incident.   The many Mexicans killed in
the anti-drug campaign have gone unnoticed in the United States.  Yet, INM
reports that 25,000 Mexican army personnel, one-fourth of the total strength,
were engaged full-time in narcotic eradication efforts in 1986; up to 50,000 army
personnel were engaged in special eradication and interdiction efforts.  Mexican
navy and marine forces are involved in interdiction programs off both coasts. 
More than 65 percent of the budget of the Mexican attorney general's office
went for the anti-narcotic campaign in 1987; and, despite budget stringency, the
attorney general's budget was one of the few to increase in real terms.
   The explosive mix of U.S. agents working in Mexico, their abduction and
murder, and the pervasiveness of corruption inherent in the drug trade came to
a head when Enrique Camarena was kidnaped, tortured, and killed in February
1985 and re-erupted when DEA agent Victor Cortez was arrested and tortured in
Guadalajara by the Jalisco judicial state police, but eventually released under
U.S. pressure, in August 1986.  The investigations in both cases, especially that
of Camarena, established without doubt the complicity of police and government
officials in the drug traffic in Mexico.
   Both cases have been amply covered in other publications.  The evidence is
clear that Camarena was fingered because of his work, including his role in
discovering irrigated fields, tractors, and barracks with beds for 100 men, all for
marijuana cultivation.  The more effective the DEA agents, the more likely they
are to be targets for retaliation by the narcotics traffickers.
   The killing of one American and arrest of another by state police did have an
impact on the Mexican anti-narcotic program that would not have occurred if
only Mexicans were involved, and served to stimulate Mexican anti-drug
efforts.  As of mid-1986, 103 drug arrests had been made, mostly in connection
with the Camarena case. 
   Despite their value in the campaign against narcotics, the presence of U.S.
drug-enforcement agents is sensitive in Mexico.  This presence is not publicized
by the Mexican authorities and there were articles in Mexican newspapers
following the Camarena case expressing astonishment about the extent of the
U.S. DEA presence.
   Del Villar, a Mexican scholar, has argued that work by DEA agents, such as
Camarena, may be indispensable for the U.S. "unilateral" program, but at the
same time has a corrupting effect on the Mexican legal structure.  He asserts
the need for symmetry, for action not just on  what the United States wants
Mexico to do but to deal as well with Mexican interests in the United States. 
The del Villar arguments -- that corruption emanates from the demand in the
United States and that Mexico's cooperation responds primarily to U.S. interests
-- are heard frequently in Mexico, although in the final analysis, they are
debating points.  Mexico's anti-drug campaign also serves Mexican interests. 
   Mexican society is not immune to the narcotics traffic no matter whether the
blame lies with demand in the United States or supply in Mexico.  There is
evidence of increasing drug addiction by Mexicans, especially young people, and
this has stimulated a serious anti-drug campaign in Mexico.  The examples of
political power exerted by drug dealers in other countries, particularly Colombia,
have not been lost on Mexican authorities -- the corrupting power of billions of
dollars has no nationality.

                             U.S. Pressures on Mexico
   The U.S. seeks to exert leverage over other countries' narcotics-control
efforts by means of negative sanctions and positive encouragements.  Negative
sanctions typically tie levels of U.S. bilateral aid to the effort exerted by a
recipient country and affect U.S. votes on loans in multilateral financial
institutions such as the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, and
the International Monetary Fund.  The adequacy of steps to control illicit
narcotics production and trafficking is made subject to a presidential
certification which, in turn, is linked to the aid.  This system of punishment
became a major issue of confrontation between the United States and Mexico
when the U.S. Senate voted (63 to 27) on April 14, 1988, to impose sanctions on
Mexico for non-cooperation in halting drug traffic.  The U.S. administration
opposed the decertification on the grounds that it would "cause significant
damage to a broad range of U.S. interests in Mexico."  The decertification bill
did not reach the floor of the House of Representatives. The Senate had one clear motive, to send a warning to the Mexican
government; and a second more speculative one, to register an anti-drug vote
for domestic political reasons in the certain knowledge that the president would
veto actual sanctions.  The Mexican reaction was predictably vitriolic, focusing
on sovereignty.  What the Senate did, as the United States frequently does,
was to treat Mexico as an inferior.
   This type of crude leverage is sure to fail when dealing with a country as
significant as Mexico.  What it does, instead, is arouse national passions to defy
the United States.  Adrian Lajous, a Mexican known to be friendly toward the
United States, commented that "We can merely rage at the arrogant, holier-than-
thou pronouncement of the U.S. Senate."  It is possible that crude leverage
using limited financial inducements can succeed in countries less significant than
Mexico, but even this is doubtful since many other issues are always on the
table in the bilateral relationship.
   Lorenzo Meyer, a respected Mexican historian and political analyst, entitled
an article he wrote on U.S.-Mexican relations in 1985 as "a bad year in a
difficult epoch."  He referred to efforts by the U.S. government to slow down
tourist travel to Mexico by repeated public threats to issue travel advisories
warning tourists that it was dangerous to travel to  particular destinations in
Mexico.  The ostensible reasons for the threats were the robbery and murder of
American tourists, but the general understanding in Mexico was that since there
were fewer of these instances in Mexico than in the United States itself, the
motive was to pressure Mexico to take energetic action to investigate the
Camarena murder.  The pressure probably worked, but the attack on tourism was
resented.  

                               A Policy Prescription
   Traffic in narcotics from Mexico to the United States raises immensely important
issues.  The argument can be made that almost any action that effectively curtails this
traffic should be taken, regardless of the consequences on the bilateral relationship. 
But stating the proposition in this stark form reveals its defects.  Effective action
against narcotics production and traffic requires a cooperative relationship, a simple
truth often lost in the accusatory rhetoric.    
   The anti-narcotics campaign is one of many issues that affect relations between the
two countries.  Economic interchange, political amity, the movement of people, the
flow of ideas -- these and many more matters define the policy approach of each
country to the other.  The various issues are linked and their totality inseparable from
the anti-narcotics effort.  Just one example illustrates the point.  The 1987 INM report
on U.S. anti-narcotics strategy in Mexico states repeatedly that much of the increase
in Mexican growing can be attributed to the decline in the country's economy.  Yet
the pressure exerted on Mexico to be more vigorous in the Camarena murder
investigation by warning against tourist travel was intended to further depress the
economy, which in turn could heighten social instability in Mexico, thereby
compromising the major U.S. policy objective, of avoiding such instability.  
   The harsh reality that the United States has many interests in other countries,
renders a sanctions policy --cooperate on drug policy, or else be punished in other
areas -- largely ineffective.  The mere threat of punishment against a country as proud
of its independence as Mexico can defeat the very cooperation that is desired.
   The pressure that is exerted is normally best done quietly, diplomatically rather
than journalistically.  Public accusations intended largely to arouse animosity of a
domestic audience against the perfidy of officials of the other country serve no useful
purpose.  Some publicity is needed in the anti-narcotics campaign; the evidence is that
the Camarena investigation and the release of Cortez were facilitated by the worldwide
publicity that was depicting Mexico as a corrupt society.  But invidious publicity must
be measured and limited to special circumstances.
   Staff members of the House foreign affairs committee surveyed the Mexican-U.S.
anti-narcotic effort in 1985 and made a number of recommendations.  In addition to
the usual charges of corruption, the main recommendations were for a more active role
by DEA agents in cooperation with the Mexican attorney general's office and better
accounting practices for the use of aircraft provided to Mexico.  Many of the
recommendations have since been acted on.  
   This staff study's first general recommendation, one applicable to the anti-narcotics
campaign globally, is that the United States must better demonstrate its own
commitment to the fight against narcotics.  The Economist, in an article on the war
on drugs, commented that "The most cutting Mexican retort" to U.S. charges of
corruption "which has yet to be answered, is that the United States is ill placed to
blame others for drug trafficking when it cannot contain its own $100 billion-a-year
drug trade."
   The U.S. drug problem would not be eliminated if there were no corruption in
Mexico.  It presumably can be better contained, however, if there is genuine
cooperation between the two countries.   This, and not mutual public scapegoating,
should be the objective of policy of each country.

Joint Destiny
   Mexico has a policy toward the border.  The details have changed as the objective
situation altered, but attention has been constant and the essential feature has been to
encourage immigration to the border area by providing incentives for creating jobs. 
The job-creating techniques have involved large expenditures on irrigation, the creation
of free zones in various border states, the development of a national border program in
1961, the border industrialization program in 1965, and ad hoc measures, such as the
articulos gancho program in the 1970s.  The measures adopted have been economic
and, from the national Mexican viewpoint, not always ideal.  The border was populated,
but the people who came looked both to the United States and to Mexico.  The
maquiladora created jobs, but has remained a fragile enclave to this date.  And,
perhaps most seriously, a large proportion of the border population developed a
political outlook in variance with that of the dominant PRI.  
   By contrast, the United States has not had a consistent policy toward its side of
the border.  A Southwest Border Regional Commission was established in 1975 and then
disbanded in 1981 out of inability to define its role.  The federal government reacted
sympathetically to the hardships caused on the border by peso devaluations, first in
1976 and then in 1982, but provided no new programs.  The interests of border
residents are ignored when the authorities in Washington, D.C., decide they must send
some sort of message to Mexico City on the drug trade, the safety of U.S. tourists, or
any other issue; the message all too often is sent by slowing down border crossings
and border-city commerce.  Washington's actions make it evident that the federal
authorities have never grasped the binational character of the border.  U.S. authorities
are uncertain whether they wish to open the border more broadly through a large free
zone or a productivity zone on both sides, or close it more by eliminating the special
import-duty provisions of 806.30/807.00.
   Cross-border cooperation is extensive in such matters of providing health and fire
services, but still poses great problems in other areas, especially of an environmental
nature.  The drug traffic prospers because the two countries share a border.  But,
above all, border relations cannot be divided between a U.S. side and a Mexican one
without causing great damage to both.  This is why U.S. actions at the border to
punish Mexico, or Mexican preaching to border residents to think more like the people
who live in Mexico City, are either damaging (the U.S. actions) or fatuous (the
Mexican lecturing).  In the interest of the millions of people who live on the border,
there is no substitute for cooperation, whether in modest things, like the small joint
health research programs that exist, or vital matters, such as working out
transboundary conservation of groundwater.  The La Paz agreement represents a start
at federal cooperation along the border.  Both countries would benefit from more. NOTES
