













                                     CHAPTER 5

                                     Industry



The fundamental purpose of this program is for Mexico to succeed in
becoming an intermediate industrial power toward the end of the
present century.... National Program for Industrial Development and
Foreign Trade, 1984-1988

The public sector is the principal buyer of capital goods in Mexico and
its actions in this respect are decisive to stimulate import substitution
and development of the capital goods industry.  Mexico:  Capital Goods
in the Present Economic Situation, 1985

Except for the maquiladora at the northern frontier, the remaining
industrial enterprises, including those most recently created, generally
have negative external balances.  Saul Trejo Reyes, 1982



Changing Industrial Policy
   Constants in post-World War II Mexican industrial policy have involved
protection of domestic industry, the imposition of domestic-content provisions to
encourage the production of intermediate goods, pressure to encourage exports by
using the leverage of import permits needed by foreign-controlled industries, and
the effort to Mexicanize industry.  The policy can be said to have worked -- a
national industry was established.  But it was costly and contained its own
difficulties, the most important of which was that the combination of importprotection and mandatory domestic-content proportions led to a lack of
competitiveness of Mexican industry generally.  Under the pressure of declining
oil-export receipts and the need to replace this revenue with other exports, the
rigidity of earlier import restrictions is being softened.  It is not yet clear to
what extent this emphasis on nonpetroleum (industrial) exports will endure if
petroleum prices rise again, since there are strong interests in industrial
protection, but Mexican industrial policy can not return to the status quo ante.
   Mexican acceptance of foreign direct investment has taken place on a
negotiated, case-by-case basis that generally has continued through the economic
crisis that has beset Mexico since 1982.  What is different, however, is that
Mexico is now beseeching foreign investors to come and the investors are not
clamoring at the gates to enter.  Flexibility on Mexicanization (majority Mexican
ownership) was passive earlier; it is now active and even being publicized abroad.
   Mexico has a modest domestic market today, but a potentially large one in
the future, and one objective of Mexican industrial policy is to use the
attraction of the actual and projected domestic market as a lure to promote
exports.  This has been at the heart of policy in at least two industries,
automotive and computers, and seems to be succeeding, as we shall see later in
the chapter.  Two essential reasons for success are the achievement of sufficient
scale of production in Mexico to keep product prices competitive and the
proximity and scope of the U.S. market.  The success relies less on the exchange
of finished goods than of intermediate products, goods which themselves are used
in the production of final goods.
   As trade increases, industry in the two countries will become increasingly
integrated.  Earlier output was primarily for sale in Mexico, but intermediate
goods will increasingly be shipped in both directions as Mexican production
becomes more competitive.  The stages of development can make industrial
exchange complementary in that U.S. technology will be exported to Mexico and
lower Mexican wage rates will be incorporated into products, particularly
intermediate products, produced in plants of sufficient size and productivity for
use in final U.S. products.
   These developments often generate substantial controversy, as we shall see in
the case of the pharmaceutical industry, but they inevitably also require
cooperation.  Industrial relations between two countries whose economies are
becoming increasingly intertwined will thus involve constant negotiation, not just
between governments, but at the industry level itself.  The two countries and,
more importantly, many of their major industries will hereafter be engaged in
constant negotiation on such basic issues as what to produce, where to produce,
and how to interchange this production.

Past Mexican Industrial Policy
   After World War II, Mexico behaved like many other catch-up countries
seeking to develop their industrial bases, assuming that underdevelopment was a
consequence of underindustrialization.   This logic came naturally, as it had to
other relatively less-developed countries during previous centuries.  From
Alexander Hamilton's 1791 Report on the Subject of Manufactures, which argued
the case for infant industry protection in the young United States, to the United
Nations Economic Commission for Latin America (Ecla) under its then director,
Raul Prebisch, the thesis was that unequal exchange was inevitable between
countries exporting primary products and those exporting manufactured goods.
This inequality, Ecla argued, manifested itself in the movement of the terms of
trade; the ratio between export and import prices allegedly deteriorated
consistently for primary commodity exporters while improving for exporters of
manufactured goods.  In practical terms, this implied that it took more and more
exports of primary products to import the same volume of manufactured goods. 
   The cure was to industrialize, a powerful thesis that swept the field in Latin
America during the 1960s and lingers in modified form to this day.  This analysis
was used to justify programs of import-substituting industrialization in all Latin
American countries capable of doing so, and even in many smaller countries
which lacked the population and income base to rely predominantly on the
internal market necessary for the policy to succeed.  It was the basis for
Mexico's development-from-within policy.
   The progression Mexico followed began with the establishment of relatively
simple industries for which there was an evident domestic market as measured by
the level of imports.  These were mostly consumer goods.  Many of these
industries already existed -- for shoes, clothing, household pots and pans, and
the like -- and new ones were established, some similar to those which existed
previously and others more complex, such as for household durables like
refrigerators, washing machines, and stoves.
   It was relatively simple to protect this production for final domestic demand
against imports.  The principal device used by Mexico was import licensing; the
denial of a license provided absolute protection, except for contraband goods. 
The result was that there was only modest competition within Mexico and
consumer goods were more costly than they would have been had imports been
permitted. This is an inevitable price that consumers must pay for infant-industry
protection.  The objective is to compensate in the long term by establishing an
industrial structure.
   What was not made evident in the original conceptualization of import-
substituting industrialization (ISI) was that while a country could keep out
competing final goods, its infant industries needed intermediate and capital goods
in the production process.  What became apparent in practice was that import
substitution did not necessarily mean curtailment of imports but a change in
their composition.  Mexico's merchandise trade deficit increased consistently until
the scarcity of foreign exchange acted as a brake on imports in 1982, and most
imports took the form of intermediate and capital goods.  In 1985, for example,
the proportions of imports were 8 percent consumer goods, 68 percent
intermediate goods, and 24 percent capital goods.  The breakdown was almost
identical in 1987.
   This first stage, what is often called "easy" import substitution, thus required
amplification.  In theory, this could have taken the form of gradually reducing
the protection offered for production of consumer goods -- infants are supposed
to grow up.  Several attempts were made to do this, all abortive, until 1986, but
the latest effort is apt to be more durable because it is embedded in a total
development policy and in international agreements with the International
Monetary Fund (IMF), the World Bank, and the General Agreement on Tariffs
and Trade (GATT).
   What Mexico did instead was to seek import substitution in intermediate goods
industries by regulation and in capital goods production by subsidization.  The
main technique used for intermediate goods, which make up the bulk of Mexico's
imports, was to impose domestic-content requirements on producers of final
goods.  This was most notable in the automotive industry, but applicable also for
computers, pharmaceuticals, and other industries.  The philosophy behind
domestic-content requirements was to force producers to buy goods in gradually
increasing proportions of the value of final goods; the practice is not unique to
Mexico.  This inevitably raised the cost of inputs, since the ability to buy from
the cheapest source was removed.  Until domestic-content requirements reach the
limiting proportion of 100 percent, this is less restrictive than denial of an
import license, but it is of the same genre.
   For capital goods, the main techniques for import substitution have been
subsidies and government purchases.  The citation at the head of this chapter
from the capital goods study undertaken jointly by the Nacional Financiera of
Mexico and the United Nations Industrial Development Organization illustrates
the latter point.  The national program of industrial development and foreign
trade 1984-1988 (Pronafice) is replete with this same recommendation of using
preferential government procurement to stimulate domestic production of capital
goods.
                      Benefits and Costs of Industrialization
   There is no simple way to measure the degree of success of past
industrialization policy. Most Mexicans, and indeed non-Mexicans, who have
examined Mexico's industrial development since World War II are convinced that
the import-substitution or infant-industry protection route was essential and that
Mexico would not have the industrial base that now exists without it.  The
proportion of manufacturing in gross domestic product (GDP) increased steadily
under ISI, at least until the 1970s.  So did employment in manufacturing; some
12 percent of Mexico's economically active population was engaged in
manufacturing in 1984, or 19 percent if a broader definition of industry is used
to include related activities such as construction. 
                Table 5.1  Sectoral Participation in Mexico's Gross
                         Domestic Product, 1950s to 1980s
                         (Average percentages for decade)

Sector                     1950s1    1960s2    1970s   1980s     1982-19863

Agriculture                 18        15        11         9         9
Mining4                      5         3         3         4         4
Manufacturing               18        22        24        24        24
Construction                 4         5         5         5         5
Electricity                  1         1         1         2         2
Commerce                    30        25        26        25        24
Transportation               3         5         6         8         8
Financial services          22        12        11        10        10
Government services5       n.a.       14        14        15        15
                           100       100       100       100       100

Source:  Calculated from Inegi data on national accounts and information
           provided by the Bank of Mexico.

Totals do not add to 100 due to rounding.

n.a. - Not available.

1Data for 1950s computed from 1960 input-output matrix, with 1960 = 100.

2Data for 1960s and subsequently use a different methodology and are not
  strictly comparable to figures for 1950s.   Base of 100 for data after
  1950s is 1970.

3Shown separately since these are the years of economic crisis.

4Includes petroleum but not petrochemicals, which are included under
  manufacturing.

5Includes only services, not government or parastatal production; latter
  is shown in appropriate sector.



   But the import-substitution policy also had costs.  The policy required
budgetary support, and government subsidies and transfers in Mexico grew from
3.6 percent of GDP in 1970 to 13.4 percent in 1981.  About 17.5 percent of
these went to manufacturing in 1980; if petroleum and basic petrochemicals and
construction are added, the proportion of subsidies and transfers came to 36
percent in 1981.  And as manufacturing and related industrial subsidies and
transfers increased, less was available in a finite budget for other sectors.  For
example, the proportion of government subsidies going to agriculture declined
sharply between 1975 and 1980, from 36.7 to 11.2 percent.
   The evidence is straightforward:  the agricultural sector was forced to finance
the industrialization of Mexico and suffered in the process.  Overall agricultural
growth averaged less than 3 percent a year after the 1960s (less than population
growth for many years) compared with growth rates between 7 and 8 percent a
year for manufacturing during the 1960s and 1970s.  One analyst argued that
making agriculture part of the industrialization process, thereby also
internationalizing it, accelerated the depopulation of the countryside into urban
slums.

               Table 5.2  Sectoral Growth in Mexico's Gross Domestic
                              Product, 1950s to 1980s
                  (Average annual percentage growth for decades)

Sector                1950s     1960s     1970s     1980s   1982-1986

Agriculture             4.2       2.8       3.2       2.8       1.3
Mining                  6.0       4.7       7.8       5.6       0.4
Manufacturing           7.3       8.2       7.2       1.3      -1.0
Construction            6.8       8.9       6.5      -0.2      -5.5
Electricity             9.2      13.9       9.9       6.1       5.5
Commerce                6.4       7.2       6.5       0.5      -2.6
Transportation/
  Communications        6.5       6.3      10.8       3.3      -0.4
Financial services      5.7       5.4       5.0       3.0       2.3
Government services    n.a.       7.0       6.5       3.0       1.1

GDP                     5.9       6.5       6.4       1.9      -0.5


Source:  See Table 5.1 for source and notes.

  The most serious consequences of the development-from-within model became
apparent when the oil market weakened.  In 1981, the year before the economic
crisis became manifest, petroleum and petroleum products constituted 75 percent
of all Mexican exports, manufactured goods only 12.5 percent.  It became evident
then, as it was to Mexican economists even during the height of the oil bonanza,
that this degree of reliance on a single export product is foolhardy.  Oil's role
in the development plans of the Lopez Portillo administration was to act as the
lever for other development, to provide the foreign exchange and tax revenue on
which other activities could build.  Oil was milked as agriculture had been
earlier.
   Petroleum products were priced domestically not at their world scarcity value,
but at subsidized levels.  They were treated as partially free goods, as
agricultural goods had been earlier.  As transfers away from the oil sector
became increasingly difficult to sustain, attention became riveted on the
noncompetitiveness of the nonoil industrial structure.  In 1985, the share of oil
exports dropped to 68 percent of the total and manufactures increased to 24
percent.  In 1986, as oil prices declined further and the export of manufactures
increased, the shares were petroleum 39 percent and manufactures 44 percent. 
The Mexican economy is still lopsided but the crisis focused official minds on
the reality that a noncompetitive industrial structure can create jobs during the
easy import substitution period, but not growing incomes after that.
   Those manufacturers who had a vested interest in maintaining Mexico's
protective structure had a corollary interest in maintaining an overvalued peso. 
Most could not compete in export markets in any event because their production
was inefficient by world standards, but it was convenient to import intermediate
and capital goods cheaply.  This elaborate structure, built over some 40 years,
became anachronistic when the oil price collapse made it imperative to develop
nonoil exports.
   It is possible that a resurgence in oil prices will lead to restoration of the
old system, but there is overwhelming evidence by now that the easier times of
industrial development from within cannot be resurrected.  This is mostly,
although not completely, recognized in Mexico's 1984-1988 industrial development
program (Pronafice).  The plan explicitly rejects a sharp dichotomy between
import substitution and export promotion, and indeed most countries' industrial
policies have a mixture of the two.  However, the stated intention is to shift the
bias toward exports for most consumer goods and some intermediate-goods
industries and to retain the import-substitution option for industries producing
significant inputs, such as chemicals and fertilizers, and capital goods.  The way
it is phrased in the plan is that import substitution in the future will have a
decidedly selective character in favor of strategic inputs and capital goods 
The plan should not be looked on as a blueprint, especially since its release
coincided with an austerity program that limited the government's operating
options, but it did represent something of a consensus when released.

Industrial Relations with the United States
   Mexico's industrial policy has often brought it into conflict with the United
States.  One reason is that setting minimum proportions of domestic content in
the production of final goods is a powerful nontariff barrier.  However, since
Mexico was not a contracting party to the GATT until 1986, the United States
had no legal handle on which to base its complaints.  The argument had to be
based on efficiency considerations and if Mexico chose to be inefficient, that
was its business.  The complaint may have more legal validity now that Mexico
is a member of the GATT, but not much more since many other contracting
parties impose domestic-content requirements on their producers.
   U.S. complaints were more vociferous regarding Mexican performance
requirements.  These were used most comprehensively in the automotive industry
and specified that vehicle assemblers cover the foreign-exchange costs of their
imports through their own or related Mexican vehicle or parts exports.  The
purpose of these provisions was similar to the domestic-content requirement, to
develop intermediate goods production in Mexico by forcing some exports, but
they went one step further by seeking to balance imports with exports in
specific sectors.  Again, while the U.S. legal case was not strong as long as
Mexico was outside the GATT, there was a powerful practical argument against
the practice since it mandated Mexican automotive exports to the United States
as the price of automotive imports from the United States, a situation U.S.
automotive companies investing in Mexico were more willing to sanction than the
U.S. government.  Official U.S. protests accomplished little though, perhaps
because until 1983 Mexico had a large and growing deficit in this sectoral trade.
   The totality of the Mexican industrial activities described above, coupled with
the trade incentives noted in chapter 4, have come to be called "targeting" in
the United States.  "Industrial targeting is defined as coordinated government
actions that direct productive resources to give domestic producers in selected
nonagricultural industries a competitive advantage."   The U.S. International
Trade Commission (USITC) cited automobiles, petroleum, petrochemicals, mining,
chemicals, electronics, cement, steel, pharmaceuticals, and various types of
machinery and consumer goods as industries targeted by Mexico.  The USITC is
equivocal about the effects of Mexican targeting, conceding that growth in
manufacturing coincided with the extensive import-substitution period while
noting some of the competitive disincentives that accompanied past Mexican
policy.
   More germane issues are whether past Mexican industrial policy compromised
U.S. industrial interests; and whether future policy need conflict with those
interests.  A related issue concerns the scope of potential for industrial
cooperation between the two countries.  The remainder of this chapter will first
examine these issues broadly, then focus on three specific industries Mexican
authorities consider strategic.

Trade and Investment Effects of Mexican Industrial Policy
   Except for temporary discontinuities during Mexican stabilization programs,
U.S. merchandise exports to Mexico increased steadily during the import-
substitution period.  The U.S. export decline was a blip in 1977 (less than $200
million from 1976, about 3.5 percent) because the austerity program was short-
lived, but was substantial in 1982 and subsequently because the austerity and
economic decline lasted longer.  The year-on-year decline in U.S. exports to
Mexico between 1981 and 1982 was $6.8 billion, or 38 percent; there was a
further decline of $2.2 billion between 1982 and 1983, or 20 percent.  The data
lead to two conclusions:  the major determinant of total U.S. exports to Mexico
is growth of the Mexican economy and not Mexican industrial policy; and while
industrial policy determines the composition of U.S. exports, it is not conclusive
in determining their volume or value.  U.S. exports to Mexico shifted in line
with the incentives established by Mexico's industrial policy, from consumer to
intermediate and capital goods.  Another way to state this is that Mexico's
policy created some winners and losers among U.S. producers; but as long as
Mexico's economy was growing satisfactorily, the winners gained more than the
losers lost.
   This can be stated more strongly.  Since the United States generally has been
losing consumer exports to all destinations during recent decades, Mexico's
import-substitution policy can be said to have favored U.S. producers.  The
policy encouraged precisely those imports in which U.S. comparative advantage
endured longest (intermediate and capital goods) and curtailed those which the
United States would have lost in any event.  While U.S. trade principles were
offended by Mexico's import-substitution policy, U.S. trade as such undoubtedly
benefited from it.  This reality may explain the subdued nature of U.S. protests.
   Mexico's foreign-investment laws and procedures are an admixture of
nationalism and deliberate industrial policy.  The nationalistic aspect is to limit
foreign equity in Mexican corporations to a minority (at least in principle).  The
policy element is to direct investment into activities that the Mexican authorities
consider to be of high priority.  Three key laws affect foreign investment: 
the foreign investment law of 1973; the technology transfer law of 1973, modified
in 1982; and the law on inventions and trademarks of 1976, amended in 1987.
   Each investment proposal involves a separate negotiation between the investor
and the national commission on foreign investment established under the 1973
foreign investment law.  These negotiations deal with the foreign equity
percentage (including exceptions to the minority presumption), displacement of
national companies, balance-of-payments effects over time, employment
consequences, use of domestic content, and the technology that comes with the
investment.  Since foreign direct investment constitutes 3 to 4 percent of gross
domestic investment, the immediate capital inflow into Mexico is not normally a
major consideration; the technology that comes with the investment and the
subsequent exports and imports it will generate are of greater moment.
   A national registry for the transfer of technology was established pursuant to
the 1973 technology transfer law, which monitors the cost and value to Mexico
of imported technology, facilitates transfer of technology to Mexican nationals,
and assists nationals in technology negotiations with foreign companies.  The law
on inventions and trademarks controls the duration of patents in Mexico, and is
generally more restrictive than comparable U.S. legislation.
   Additional laws and decrees apply to specific industries, each having its own
regulations; and sometimes there are additional regulations without decrees.  The
result is a complicated network, with varying requirements depending on the size
of investment, the sector, location, and the nature of production and technology
accompanying the investment.
   Tables 5.3 and 5.4 tell a story roughly analogous to that of trade, that the
level of new U.S. foreign direct investment (FDI) in Mexico depends less on
Mexican regulations than on the growth prospects of the Mexican economy, since
the main objective of most foreign companies is to expand their internal market
in Mexico.  The salience of Mexican economic growth as the stimulator of FDI
can be seen clearly in table 5.3.  The capital inflows were large in 1980 and
1981 when GDP growth rates were high, declined in 1982 when the economy
faltered, and then dropped sharply after that when the economy was in crisis.  
   About two-thirds of FDI in Mexico comes from the United States, and U.S.
investors behaved as did other investors -- they came to Mexico in the good
economic years and stayed away in the bad ones (table 5.4).  One reason for
this is that MNCs came to Mexico primarily to exploit the domestic market,
which is not really what the Mexican government had in mind.
   The operations of MNCs in Mexico have been analyzed in many studies over
an extended period.   The results tend to be ambivalent, reflecting concern 


            Table 5.3  Direct Foreign Investment in Mexico, 1950-19851
                               (Millions of dollars)

                                           New       Intra-Company
          Years            Total       Investment       Accounts    Reinvestment

          1950-592         103.8           61.2            9.4           33.1
          1960-692         171.2           96.1           10.5           64.6
          1970-792         569.8          239.3           54.4          276.2
          1980           2,164.6          860.4          369.3          935.0
          1981           2,835.7        1,336.5          234.1        1,265.1
          1982           1,657.3          956.7          -69.8          770.4
          1983             460.5           70.2          193.0          197.3
          1984             391.1          543.4         -367.6          215.3
          1985             490.5          269.6          -10.9          231.8

          Source:  Data provided by the Bank of Mexico

          Totals may not add due to rounding.

          1The figures are actual capital flows, not commitments to invest.  The
            latter are often published as foreign direct investment received by
            Mexico.

          2Annual averages.  The use of an annual average for a decade makes the
            jump in flows from 1979 to 1980 appear larger than it was.  The foreign
            direct investment flow increased during the 1970s from $316.2 million
            in 1970 to $1,371.4 in 1979.  There were also annual increases during
            most of the 1950s and 1960s.



          Table 5.4  U.S. Direct Investment in Mexico, Yearend 1980-19861
                               (Millions of dollars)

                       1980      1981      1982      1983      1984      1985      1986

Total, worldwide       215,578   226,359   207,752   207,203   212,994   229,748   259,890
In developed
  countries            158,350   165,396   154,381   155,736   157,461   171,869   194,710
In developing
  countries             53,277    56,182    48,058    45,746    50,131    52,539    60,609

Mexico:  value           5,989     6,977     5,019     4,381     4,568     5,070     4,826

  As % world            2.8       3.1       2.4       2.1       2.1       2.2       1.9
  As % developing
    countries          11.2      12.4      10.4       9.6       9.1       9.6       8.0

Percent U.S. invest-
  ment in Mexico in:
     manufacturing     75.0      74.1      78.1      78.7      79.5      80.3      81.4
     Wholesale trade   12.12     12.62      6.8       8.0       9.0      10.3       9.4
     Finance and
       insurance3       3.3       2.6       3.6       3.3       4.2       3.6       3.4
     Other              9.6      10.7      11.5      10.0       7.3       5.8       5.8
                      100.0     100.0     100.0     100.0     100.0     100.0     100.0


Source:  Survey of Current Business, various issues.

1The figures are based on book value of direct investors' equity in and outstanding
  loans to foreign affiliates, that is, firms in which a foreign investor owns at least
  10 percent of voting securities or the equivalent.

2Investment in retail trade is included in these years.

3Excludes banking.

over the loss of Mexican control of the leading sectors of the economy while at
the same time recognizing the need for investment that reflects the priorities of
the authorities.  This double sentiment is inherent in the 1973 foreign investment
law, which was itself intended to be a compilation of previous regulations, 
although it turned out to be marginally more restrictive.  The provision calling
for minority foreign ownership continues to be sensitive despite the fact that it
is now often breached, and Mexican authorities worry that it would be politically
explosive to actually change the law.  President de la Madrid reflected this
Mexican sensitivity when, following a U.S.-Mexican interparliamentary meeting in
May-June 1986, he responded to suggestions from U.S. delegates that the law
should be changed to permit foreign majority equity:
   We are not about to receive lectures on what is appropriate
structural change for Mexicans in a way that would cause Mexico to
lose its national essence...  Regarding foreign investment, we will
continue to do what we want.  [Foreign investment] should submit to
our laws, our sovereignty, and support the priorities of the economic
course of action that we define.
   Some highlights of a study by Kurt Unger, a Mexican economist who examined
the trade consequences of foreign investment, merit examination.  Unger
divided exports into priority and nonpriority categories, basing these on the
classifications used in the 1979-1982 industrial development plan.  (About 60
percent of all production fell into the priority category in that plan.)  He found
that in 1980, 25 percent of exports were from nonpriority activities.  The
remaining exports were from priority activities:  47 percent either nondurable or
durable consumer goods; 21 percent intermediate goods; and only 7 percent
capital goods.  Thirty percent of the exports of national companies were from
nonpriority activities (1975) and only 16 percent of foreign firm exports were in
this nonpriority category.  Fully 45 percent of exports of national firms were of
nondurable consumer goods (only 5 percent of foreign firms' exports were in this
category).  By contrast, 73 percent of the exports of foreign firms were either
consumer durables or intermediate goods (compared with only 18 percent in these
categories for national firms).
   Unger defined dynamic exports (he used the words en surgimiento) as those
priority goods whose exports were large and made up a significant proportion of
production.  For these products, he found that 74 foreign firms (of the 708
foreign firms which produced priority manufactures in 1975) handled 91 percent
of the exports.  He then constructed a ratio of the value added in Mexico to
imports (VA/M) for all manufactured exports and this came to 2.73 (1975); for
priority activities the ratio was 2.36.  The ratio for nonpriority goods was higher
(4.41) and was highest of all for nonpriority, nondurable consumer goods (24.05). 
The significance of these ratios is that the import content of most exports is
quite high (about 37 cents of imports for each $1 of manufactured exports),
except in those nonpriority activities in which Mexican resources form the basis
for exports (which require only 4 cents of imports for each dollar of exports). 
The import content of exports was high in the automotive, electrical equipment,
basic chemicals, pharmaceutical, and capital goods industries; most sales of
foreign firms in these and other priority industries are in the domestic Mexican
market.  Unger raises the question of whether the high import content of
Mexico's priority exports does not contradict conventional arguments about
Mexico's comparative advantage.  Only nondurable consumer exports use a high
proportion of Mexican inputs.
   These findings support one of the key criticisms made by opponents of
industrial policy, that governments can propose but companies acting in their
own interest do most of the disposing.  Mexico's regulations may have raised
domestic content in many productive activities but still left the country with a
high import content in the exports most avidly promoted.  Domestic content
dominated precisely where the government did not explicitly seek it.
   Mexican opponents of MNCs have sometimes used data on imports and exports
of MNCs, making estimates of the true value of intrafirm transactions, to show
that MNCs as a group import more than they export.  This evidence is then used
to imply that MNCs are harmful to the Mexican economy.  There is a kernel
of truth to the criticism, but it is overall a simple-minded analysis, valuable only
as polemic.  It omits many economic effects that MNCs have on employment and
in stimulating the growth of supplier and buyer industries within Mexico.  MNCs
may have had a negative trade balance in most years, but usually far less
negative than domestic manufacturing firms.  While MNCs are vastly more
export-oriented than domestic firms, their main market remains within Mexico.
   The Mexican authorities established criteria in permitting foreign investment
and, for the most part, these have been met.  MNCs were sought in priority
activities and Unger's data and the other studies cited earlier show that this,
too, was accomplished.  Finally, MNCs were encouraged successfully by the
import-substitution policy to produce final goods for sale in Mexico more than
intermediate or capital goods.  Yet, the achievement of these objectives is the
very source of most complaints against MNCs -- that they dominate priority
activities in Mexico and do not produce or export enough Mexican goods with
high VA/M ratios.  Mexico mostly got the foreign investment it wanted but did
not want what it got.

Specific Industries
   One of this study's central themes is that centripetal forces of geography and
the desire to raise incomes and employment have resulted in an ever-increasing
degree of economic integration between Mexico and the United States.  But
various aspects of Mexico's industrial policy are designed to separate rather than
integrate, including limits on foreign equity holdings and domestic-content and
performance requirements.  The evidence indicates, however, that even where
these national measures succeeded -- indeed, precisely because they succeeded --
economic integration intensified.
   U.S. MNCs hold large market shares in Mexico for food processing, chemicals,
machinery, and electrical, electronic, and transportation equipment, and are a
major factor in the trade between the two countries.  More than half of U.S.
manufactured imports from Mexico in 1979 were from intracompany, or what is
known as related-party, sales.  There is often much competition for market
shares between producers in the two countries -- this is evident in the steel and
cement industries -- but also substantial cooperation.  The cooperation is
facilitated by the large trade in components rather than finished products.  The
maquiladora exemplify intraindustry trade and production exploiting the factor
and market advantages of each country -- the cheap labor in Mexico and the
market in the United States -- but the cooperation extends beyond what are
essentially assembly plants.  What follows is an examination of cooperation and
conflict, and the potential for more cooperation, in three specific industries --
automotive, computers, and pharmaceuticals.  All are of high priority in Mexico,
and each reflects both the workings of Mexican industrial policy and the growing
industrial integration between the United States and Mexico.  Other industries,
such as machinery and chemicals, demonstrate the same points.
   Cooperation between unequals has the potential for duress and exploitation, a
truth all too evident from the history of U.S.-Mexican economic relations.  U.S.
coercion was most blatant in the oil industry and partly explains the popularity
of the nationalization of the industry in 1938.  However, as Robert Keohane has
noted in an analysis of political-economic relations among developed countries: 
"Hegemonic cooperation is not a contradiction in terms."  Industrial
cooperation is made operational primarily through bargaining, sometimes at an
intergovernmental level but also at the industry level or between a private U.S.
company and the government-industry combination in Mexico.  The interference
that marked official U.S. support of the oil industry in the years before
nationalization is no longer the norm in U.S.-Mexican relations.  Though the
U.S. government still occasionally exerts pressure on behalf of U.S. MNCs
operating in Mexico, this is no longer the rule, but the exception.  On the
Mexican side, outright nationalization of foreign-owned enterprises has not been
the practice since the oil expropriation.  When Lopez Portillo nationalized the
banks in 1982, he deliberately refrained from taking over the U.S. Citibank
operation in Mexico.
   Both governments enter into the bilateral industrial bargaining process. 
Mexico does so largely through its majority ownership, domestic-content, and
export requirements, and also through controls on technology and prices; the
U.S. does so frequently by the threat to withhold trade concessions (on which
more below).  It is unclear which government will act more hegemonically in any
given industrial negotiation. The U.S. government pressure is exerted on the
Mexican government while that of the Mexican government focuses on the
foreign MNC.  Under these circumstances, the very concept of hegemony loses
clarity.

                                    Automotive
   The automotive industry is probably the best example to illustrate the
industrial policy of Mexico.  Mexican authorities have devoted much attention
and substantial resources to it.  Because it was seen as the industrial activity
par excellence to stimulate a host of related activities to supply parts and
services, automotive development was guided by a series of decrees focusing on
industry ownership, domestic content, and export stimulation, supplemented by
import restrictions and vast direct and indirect subsidies.  In short, the
government picked what it decided was a winner, then tried to validate that
choice via its subsequent actions.  Whether the benefits in production,
employment, and income exceeded the costs of the policy over the past 25 years
is hard to say --  there is no easy measure of the opportunity cost of devoting
resources to one industry rather than another.
   Automotive development has been described in many studies and will only be
sketched in here in order to provide perspective for the policy discussion. 
Policy for the industry was set in a series of decrees, the main ones being in
1962, 1972, 1977, and 1983.  These decrees were accompanied by detailed
implementing regulations and they established the ground rules for foreign
investors.  The most important provisions involved domestic-content requirements,
limits on vertical integration by assemblers in order to encourage parts
production by Mexican-owned companies, export requirements as the as the quid
pro quo for allowing assemblers to import parts, and limitations on the number
of models that could be assembled in order to achieve scale economies in
production.
   The general intent of the government remained reasonably consistent for a
quarter century.  One objective was to reduce the number of lines and models
produced in Mexico to achieve economies of scale in the terminal industry; this
was achieved only in the years after the most recent decree, that of 1983.  In
1984 there were still seven terminal companies which produced 244,704
automobiles; these seven plus two others together produced 113,294 trucks in
1984.  The government also wished to Mexicanize the terminal industry, but
this has not happened; foreign companies still dominate this sector of the
industry.
   Another goal was to balance imports and exports in the automotive industry,
but this was slow in coming.  The automotive trade deficit peaked in 1981 at
$2.1 billion, which was 58 percent of the total merchandise deficit.  The deficit
declined sharply in 1982 and was more or less in balance in subsequent years. 
The bilateral trade balance with the United States in vehicles and parts was $1.4
billion in favor of the United States in 1981, but only $180 million in the U.S.
favor in 1985.  Automotive parts are now among Mexico's most dynamic
exports.  It is difficult to know whether the current pattern in automotive trade
is durable since in addition to growing parts exports, it reflects the decline in
Mexico's economy and the lack of availability of foreign exchange for imports.
   The development of a parts industry dominated by Mexican-owned firms was
mostly, but not completely, accomplished.   The techniques employed were local-
content regulations; the inclusion of parts exports as part of the export-
performance requirements of the terminal industry; the provision of the 1972
decree calling for 60 percent Mexican equity for new parts firms compared with
the norm of 51 percent for industry generally; and the limitation on vertical
integration by the terminal industry, which is mostly foreign dominated.
   There are some 750 firms in the parts industry and, with some exceptions,
especially the maquiladora near the U.S. border, most are completely or majority
Mexican-owned.   Employment in the automotive industry is about 115,000 (1984
estimate) and about 60 percent is in the parts as opposed to the terminal
industry.   About 90 percent of automotive exports in recent years have been
parts as opposed to finished automobiles or trucks.
   These indicators of a successful policy are counterbalanced by some outcomes
that had not been anticipated.  Most parts exports are from firms which, while
Mexicanized, have substantial foreign equity.  This may be what should have
been expected, that foreign (especially U.S.) parts suppliers prefer to rely on
affiliated firms to which they are also more prone to supply new technology. 
Bennett has also shown that when the parts industry is broken down by principal
components, it is highly concentrated.  He attributes this to barriers to entry,
some inherent in the production process (particularly scale and technology), but
others the result of policy.  Among the latter he highlights the need for prior
approval by the interministerial commission before output of a new firm can
qualify as local content and before new technology can be imported, and
institutional difficulties of obtaining credit.
   The Mexican automotive industry has had its ups and downs and these have
reflected two related cyclical considerations -- the state of the U.S. economy
and particularly the state of the Mexican economy.  The year 1982 was
essentially a neutral one for the industry, 1983 atrocious, 1984 bad but not
seriously so, 1985 very good, and 1986 a bad year once again.  These
characterizations correlate closely with growth of the Mexican economy in each
of the years.  Looking ahead for the rest of this century, growth of the U.S.
economy is apt in the long run to be almost as important for the industry as
growth in Mexico.  This is because, for better or worse, the export market is
gaining in relative importance and the critical export market is the United
States, another example of the integration of the two economies.
   Despite the official U.S. criticism of Mexican targeting in the automotive
industry, U.S. and other foreign companies have responded to the rules laid down
by Mexico.  Each of the U.S. big three companies has expanded Mexican
operations in recent years.  Ford, in 1983, invested in a stamping and assembly
plant in Hermosillo, Chihuahua, and opened a new engine plant in Chihuahua
City.  Both these operations envisage exports to the United States.  About 25
percent of Chrysler's engines world-wide are produced in Mexico, and General
Motors entered into a minority joint venture with Mexican interests to produce
an estimated 50,000 heavy trucks by 1987, largely for export.  The other major
foreign car and truck producers, Nissan, Renault, and Volkswagen, have also
expanded investment in Mexico.
   There is, of course, another major consideration prompting foreign investment
in the Mexican automotive industry and that is the prospective market within
Mexico itself.  The largest potential growth for automotive sales is not in
industrial countries, in which most sales are to replace existing cars, but in the
more advanced developing countries in which income increases will lead to new
sales.  In a discussion of periodic transformations in the automotive industry, the
automobile study program of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology projects
that the next major change is apt to take place in the late 1980s and 1990s
when production will be concentrated in locations with low factor costs and
growing markets.  Mexico fits this description.
   The MIT study makes another point that ties Mexico's automotive destiny
with the United States.  The final assembler is the coordinator of increasingly
intricate production and marketing systems, and the final assemblers in Mexico
are mostly U.S. companies, the same companies to which parts are being exported
by Mexico.
   The development of its automotive industry has been costly to Mexico. The
program was conceived to achieve a large degree of independence for Mexico in
automotive production, but at the very moment that many other objectives of the
program are being achieved, particularly the growth in exports to compensate for
imports and perhaps even to consistently exceed imports, independence is more
elusive than ever.  The Mexican automotive industry is closely tied to the United
States because that is where the export market is.  Except to an ultra-
nationalist, however, this need not be cause for alarm.  The dependency is
complex since the production and export platforms are in Mexico and the market
is U.S. companies in Mexico and the United States.  All parts of this exchange
are necessary for the chain to hold together.

                                     Computers
   The general philosophy underpinning development of the computer industry is
similar to that of the automotive industry but with substantial differences
stemming from the value of output, employment, and the timing of startup.  The
computer industry program contains such familiar features as majority Mexican
ownership as the preferred norm, domestic content in production, and export
expansion.  Compromise on these features, especially on 100 percent foreign
ownership of new investment, came quickly in the development of the computer
industry.  This was caused partly by the circumstance that the most important
computer negotiation took place with IBM in 1984 and 1985, when economic
uncertainty made Mexico more a seeker of foreign investment than the recipient
of requests by investors.  Mexico's power to dictate the terms of foreign
investment was never complete, but was clearly greater during the halcyon years
of the 1960s and much of the 1970s than it has been since 1982.
   A study prepared for the U.S. Department of Commerce estimated that
Mexico's production of mini- and microcomputers and peripherals was $283
million in 1984 and was expected to increase at an annual rate of 21 percent to
$609 million in 1988.  The percentage increases are large because of the low
base, but the absolute numbers are still modest for an economy as large as
Mexico's.  There were few computer or peripheral exports until the 1980s, but
the situation has been changing since 1985 and should alter further under the
agreement with IBM.  The import level was estimated at more than $100 million
in 1984, but the figure is not meaningful because of the large gray or
clandestine market in imported computers and peripherals.  This, too, may
change under the agreement with IBM since the price difference between
Mexican and imported personal computers will be modest.
   The interest of foreign firms in the market for hardware and software in
Mexico is based on expectations similar to those of the automotive industry, that
what is today a modest market is likely to grow into a substantial future market. 
The study for the Department of Commerce estimated that the market for
hardware will grow to $666 million in 1988 plus about half of that for software. 
Both markets, for hardware and software, are dominated by firms affiliated with
U.S. companies, in each case with IBM in the lead (about 45 percent for
hardware and 37 percent for software), but with other companies actively
participating.  In 1985, there were 18 minicomputer  and 14 microcomputer
suppliers, and about 200 software operations, both  joint ventures and local
operations.
   The Mexican authorities developed a plan for the computer industry in 1981,
but this was not formalized into a decree.  The plan had the usual features
(Mexicanization, domestic content, export pressure) and did serve as the basis
for approval of investment in the hardware and peripheral industry despite its
lack of legal status as a decree.  The framework of this plan guided the Mexican
authorities in their negotiation with IBM.  However, the flexibility allowed
Mexican negotiators under the foreign-investment law did permit IBM to achieve
its standard policy of obtaining 100 percent equity.
   Various features of the IBM agreement are worth describing because they
illustrate important aspects of Mexican treatment of foreign investment.  These
include both the case-by-case negotiating procedure and the flexibility which the
Mexican authorities regularly publicize to downplay the Mexicanization features
of the foreign-investment law; the tradeoffs the authorities are willing to make
on ownership and even domestic content for export expansion and technological
development; and the political booby traps that negotiators must confront in
making these tradeoffs.  The negotiations with IBM took place over
approximately two years, from February 1984 to late 1985.  IBM is a large
company and can spare personnel for this lengthy process.  Smaller companies
may not be able to do this and it has only been since the IBM experience, and
the lengthy negotiation with Ford, coupled with the Mexican quest for new
foreign investment, that some relaxation of the case-by-case approach has been
made for smaller companies, particularly those bringing high technology to
Mexico.
   Mexico was attractive to IBM for a number of reasons.  A plant producing
electronic typewriters and system 36 computers, employing 400 people, already
existed in El Salto, Jalisco, near Guadalajara.  IBM officials also cited other
attractions of investing in Mexico:  its political stability; the long period without
exchange controls (other than at the close of the Lopez Portillo administration
in late 1982) which allowed conversion of pesos into dollars and profit
remittances; the general lack of confiscations of foreign investment in Mexico
since the petroleum experience in 1938; the proximity of the plant to the
maquiladora production of semi-conductors; and Mexico's membership in the Latin
American Integration Association (Aladi, from its Spanish name), which
potentially provided some trade concessions for exports to other Latin American
countries.
   IBM's first proposal, omitting detail, was to make personal computers (PCs) in
its plant, export about 90 percent of the output, or approximately $500 million a
year in gross terms once in full operation, and set up a distribution network in
Mexico.  There was a complex formula on local content.  IBM's insistence on 100
percent ownership sparked opposition from other foreign computer firms that had
already invested in Mexico since the latter (Apple and Hewlett-Packard, for
example) had accepted 49 percent equity for microcomputer production. 
Mexican-owned firms with a vested interest in minimizing competition also
objected to the IBM equity proposal.  The first decision of the foreign
investment commission, in December 1984, rejected the IBM proposal, but the
Mexican authorities let it be known that they wanted IBM to resubmit a
proposal. The ownership issue, despite publicity in both the Mexican and U.S.
press, would not be a major negotiating item since the Mexican authorities had
the authority to agree to 100 percent IBM ownership and it was clear that IBM
considered it a sine qua non for an overall agreement.
   The next round of negotiations was more focused, and was preceded by a
private discussion between IBM officials and President de la Madrid.  The key
issue was the amount of exports and the trade balance within the industry --
the Mexicans wished to achieve positive net exports once the plant was
functioning.  It is worth recalling that it took Mexico more than 20 years to
accomplish this in the automotive industry.  Domestic content, which is related
to the trade-balance question, was both a technical and practical negotiating
issue in order to determine what should be counted in the percentage (labor,
overhead, markup, indirect parts and assembly, as well as the local value added
in the direct parts used in assembly of the final product) and the time to
achieve a given percentage.  The last point involved an assessment of a learning
curve for production of domestic content. The agreement called for reaching 65
percent domestic content in 1987 and 82 percent by 1989 and thereafter.
   Job creation was an issue, both in numbers of jobs in IBM and the nature and
extent of technical development of Mexicans.  A press release of the Mexican
embassy in the United States refers to the creation of 1,700 new jobs over a
five-year period.  Some of the training elements of the agreement involve
scholarships for Mexicans at IBM facilities throughout the world, planned at four
to five persons a year, partnerships with Mexican universities, for example, for
teaching CAD/CAM (computer-aided design/computer-aided manufacturing) at the
Monterrey Institute of Technology (Instituto Tecnologico de Estudios Superiores
de Monterrey) and the establishment of a semi-conductor technology center at
the National Polytechnical Institute in Mexico City.
   The heart of the agreement, most of which has been made public, calls for an
initial IBM investment of $90 million for the production, initially, of the PC XT,
with the intent to export at least 90 percent of production, generating more
than $600 million of gross exports and $100 million in net foreign exchange
earnings over five years.   The understanding is that a particular effort is to be
made to export to other Latin American and Caribbean countries and to buy
imported parts from these countries.  Software centers are to be established in
Spanish-speaking countries. The difference in price for PCs sold in Mexico and
those sold in the United States will be kept within 10 to 15 percent.  IBM
participation in the Mexican microcomputer market is not to exceed 33 percent
unless the export ratio increases.
   The IBM agreement is a specific demonstration of the point stressed
throughout this chapter, that there is apt to be increasing integration between
the two countries in significant industrial activities.  The important elements of
the negotiation centered on three issues:  the technology transfer; cooperation
between IBM and Mexican parts producers and authorities; and increasing
Mexican exports.  The fact that the United States and Mexico are at different
stages in the development of their computer industries facilitated this
cooperation.  The agreement should permit IBM in the United States to move on
to other activities while at the same time upgrading Mexico's technical position
and encouraging its exports.

                                  Pharmaceuticals
   The pharmaceutical industry in Mexico is an example of industrial integration
marked by foreign domination.  As such, it is at the stage of the automotive
industry prior to the first decree in 1962.  The Mexican authorities believe that
the structure that exists in this industry is lopsided in favor of Americans and
other foreigners and the decrees and regulations being promulgated are designed 
to make the benefits more symmetrical.
   The policy thrust of the Mexican authorities has the elements discussed for
other industries:  Mexicanization; domestic content; export insistence; and   
             Table 5.5  Key Elements of the Agreement Between IBM and
                       the Mexican Government, January 1986

IBM investment in Mexico over five years                       $91 million

IBM equity                                                     100 percent

Production of microcomputers over five years                   603,000 units

New computer export proportion                                 92 percent

Local content - rising from 51 percent at end of first
  year to fourth year                                          82 percent

Price differential on microcomputers sold in Mexico
  and U.S.  Limited to                                         10-15 percent

Exports, over five years:  gross                               $600 million
   net foreign-exchange earnings                               $100 million

Time delay on introduction into Mexico of new
  PC line in U.S.                                              six months

Expected employment:   direct                                  240 jobs
                       indirect                                1,460 jobs

Establishment of semiconductor technology center

Development of distribution center for exports

Partnership programs with Mexican universities

Scholarships for Mexican technicians


Sources:  Interviews with officers of IBM and Mexican government; Julia
          Christine Vindasius, "Mexico and IBM:  A Look at State-TNC
          Negotiation and Bargaining Power," p. 61.

government favoritism to Mexican-owned firms.  However, the industry has its
own peculiarities because of the social and health implications of its products. 
Some background can put the policy issues into context.
   Total industry sales in the year ending April 1986 were almost $230 million. 
MNCs dominate -- of the 40 most important companies by value of sales, 38 are
foreign-dominated and 35 are completely foreign-owned.  The two Mexican-owned
companies in the top 40 are at the bottom of the list.
   Foreign domination has repercussions on research since MNCs prefer to do
research at home, where there is a critical mass of technicians; with rare
exceptions, Mexico is not innovative in the pharmaceutical industry.  The
foreign companies cite this as evidence of Mexico's need for their presence, but
the lack of research is also a consequence of the structure of the industry. 
This combination rankles:  foreign domination; research done abroad; and then
lecturing Mexico about its need for the MNCs because of the lack of domestic
research.  It is particularly annoying because the syllogism is accurate.
   The pharmaceutical industry's ability to draw on the support of the U.S.
government in its conflicts with the Mexican government also gets under the
Mexican skin.  It is a situation roughly analogous to the petroleum industry
before nationalization.  In the first case, U.S. coercion dealt with basic issues,
such as diplomatic recognition of the Mexican government and ownership of
subsoil resources.  In the case of the pharmaceutical industry, the stakes have
not been as high, but do deal with Mexico's ability to export non-pharmaceutical
goods to the United States.  The trouble started when the U.S. government
delayed approval of an agreement concerning countervailing duties imposed
against subsidized Mexican exports until Mexico made concessions in regulations
implementing a February 1984 pharmaceutical decree, particularly the features
relating to patent protection.  The issue of intellectual property rights has
subsequently recurred and is still a subject of contention between the two
governments.  This is a major shortcoming of excessive and evident U.S.
government pressure on behalf of specific private interests operating abroad; the
skirmishes may be won but the war continues.
   The purpose of the February 1984 decree and subsequent implementing
regulations was to make Mexico more self-sufficient in pharmaceutical
production, particularly of the active ingredients.   A second objective was to
increase the supply of low-cost drugs, using a combination of generic labeling of
basic retail drugs and stringent price controls.  The decree singles out more than
60 active ingredients for which the objective is to replace imports by domestic
production.  The domestic-content provisions, namely the purchase of raw
materials, were to rise gradually over three to five years to 50 percent. The
industry trade deficit with the United States in 1984, the year the decree was
promulgated, was $152 million (imports $190 million and exports $38 million) and
the decree, in imprecise fashion, encouraged exports.  Companies were
mandated to set aside 4 percent of feedstock sales for research and development
in Mexico.
   While dependent on foreign companies, the Mexican government has weapons
of its own.  Mexico has an extensive social security and public health system
and more than half of all pharmaceutical sales are to the government through a
bidding process.  At the time of the decree, 75 foreign companies supplied 72
percent of the domestic market but only about 50 percent of the government-
controlled market, which implies national favoritism in government
procurement.  As noted in one of the headnotes to this chapter, thegovernment makes no secret of its intention to increase industrialization and
Mexicanization through its procurement power.
   Government price controls are another element of potential government
leverage.  The controls have a social motive, to permit the poor to purchase
medicines, but they can obviously affect company profits.  The laws and
regulations protecting intellectual property can be a further powerful tool of
government pressure.  The 1976 law on inventions and trademarks limits patent
protection to ten years; if a patent is not exploited within four years of issue, it
falls into the public domain.  When the law was passed, MNCs held 85 to 90
percent of pharmaceutical patents and many of these then fell into the public
domain.  Many pharmaceutical products can now not be patented at all under the
law.  Foreign companies are concerned that these laws, already restrictive by
standards of industrial countries, may be made more restrictive.
   The purpose here is not to take sides between the industry, particularly the
MNCs which dominate it, and the Mexican government, whose motives are a
mixture of social concern, the desire to enhance domestic research, and the wish
to have Mexico play a larger role in the production of pharmaceuticals for use
in its own market.  The pharmaceutical industry is one in which there is still
much conflict.  This may change with time, as it has changed in the two other
industries discussed in this chapter.


   
NOTES
