




                                     CHAPTER 9


                                     Migration


   The predominant view in the United States is that Mexican
immigration is a crime-related phenomenon...It overlooks the real
context in which the presence of the undocumented Mexican migrant
in the United States responds to an economic relation that has costs
and benefits for both the country of origin and the country of
destination in the migratory process.  Jorge Bustamante, 1985.

   [t]he strategic factor in initiating the migrant streams to fill these
jobs is active recruitment on the part of employers or their agents
from the developed region....Michael J. Piore, 1979.

   Consequently, the net effect of an increase in labor supply due to
immigration is to increase the aggregate income of the native-born
population.  Economic Report of the (U.S.) President, 1986.




Sovereignty and Morality

   There is no more vivid example of asymmetry between nations than the
movement of Mexicans to the United States.  There is a variety of reasons for
this flow, but the predominant motivation is economic, to earn more money in
the United States than can be earned in Mexico.  This bespeaks a relative lack
of opportunity in Mexico, which makes emigration at once humiliating and
tranquilizing.  In the United States, the immigration from Mexico is desired by
some groups and resented by others; the balance between the two shifts with the
times, but the polar pressures always coexist.
   The U.S. Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 (IRCA), more generally
referred to by the names of its two sponsors, Senator Alan K. Simpson and
Representative Peter W. Rodino, Jr. represents a manifestation of sovereignty. 
As phrased in the Economic Report of the President, 1986: "As a sovereign
Nation, the United States must responsibly decide not only who may cross its
borders, but also who may stay."  Mexico, so zealously protective of its own
sovereignty, has no choice but to recognize the U.S. right to control entry of
persons.
   Yet there is a moral question.  Entry of Mexicans into the United States,
with or without proper documents, has been going on for more than a century. 
It has been substantial since World War II, when the United States, because of
labor shortages, solicited the Mexican workers under the bracero program.  There
was, in effect, a common-law agreement between the two countries, one seeking
and the other providing workers, and there is an understandable Mexican concern
over one-sided change in a traditional practice involving two parties.  
   In the contest between sovereignty and morality, sovereignty inevitably won. 
U.S. authorities owe their primary responsibility to U.S. nationals, not to
Mexicans.  Morality was not neglected in the amnesty or legalization provisions
of the U.S. legislation, but these could have been more generous had morality
been given greater weight.   
   Many of the themes discussed in this book affect the people of the two
countries only indirectly.  The degree of democracy they enjoy is not an issue
uppermost in the minds of most Mexicans.  The effects of foreign trade or
foreign direct investment are not apparent to most persons of the two countries. 
The Mexican in the barrio and the American in the inner city hardly thinks
about issues of dependency, asymmetry, or  historical grievances.  But migration
is different.  It is a movement of people, not of goods and services.  Sovereignty
and morality may be abstractions, but they affect issues like deportation and
amnesty, whether families can stay together or must be separated, and these
issues concern people in the most direct form imaginable -- where they can live,
how they live, and with whom they live. 
   This chapter first discusses the economic basis for migration, then reviews
migration from Mexico to the United States, and concludes with a discussion of
the policy issues involved.

The Economic Basis of Migration
   There is no single explanation of why people move from one location to
another, within a country or to another country.  The explanatory variables
include a desire for economic betterment, political freedom, family reunion, life-
style habits of sending and receiving localities, physical danger from war,
pestilence, and hunger, and adventure.  The dominant explanation, certainly for
migration from Mexico to the United States, is economic, although this is clearly
combined with proximity; Mexicans do not emigrate in great numbers to Europe. 
   The catchall phrase used to capture the economic motivation for migration is
push-pull:  poor conditions in the sending country, more attractive ones in the
receiving country.  There is a vast literature on push-pull in general and
specifically in relation to migration from Mexico to the United States.  Much of
of it seeks to determine whether the push out of Mexico or the pull into the
United States predominates, but migration responds to the combination of push
and pull forces.
   But economics does not explain everything.  Not all Mexicans respond to the
differences in earning potential between staying at home or emigrating to the
United States.  Many regularly leave the rural areas of their upbringing to seek
opportunity and work in metropolitan job markets within Mexico
rather than cross the border into the United States.  Some move from one
location within Mexico to another, then to a third location, either inside or
outside the country.  There is evidence that one move begets another by the
same person -- movement becomes familiar, and each of these variations responds
to a self-selection; some people migrate and others do not, even when presented
with identical economic stimuli.  Alejandro Portes has tried to capture these
individual idiosyncracies by focusing on the structural rather than economic basis
for migration, but this hardly answers the question.  What it does is point out
that men and women do not emigrate only because of wage differentials; and
that everyone in Mexico who can earn more in the United States does not
leave.  
   Still, repeated interviews with the migrants show that the overwhelming
impulse for migration is economic.  The stimulus may be a short-term economic
downturn, a conviction by the migrant that long-term earning opportunities are
greater in the United States, a sense of responsibility to family and village well-
being, and carrying out practices that have become traditional in particular
locations.  This last is demonstrated by data that show consistency over time
from the main sending areas in Mexico.  The leading sending states in Mexico
have been, in varying order at different times, Jalisco, Chihuahua, Michoacan,
Zacatecas, and Guanajuato, although from time to time other states, such as San
Luis Potosi and Coahuila, have been important senders. 
   Weintraub and Stolp constructed a series of econometric models seeking to
capture the main economic variables that explain why Mexicans emigrate.  Some
were based on push factors, others on pull factors, and one on joint push-pull.
Mexican GDP and U.S. non-agricultural wages were significant variables at the 95
percent confidence level in explaining economic migration to the United States. 
The same study sought to project Mexican economic migration to the United
States to the year 2000, and concluded that it would be unwise to anticipate an
easing of emigration pressure over this period regardless of the international
economic setting.
   The quotation from Michael Piore at the head of this chapter represents a
significant element in understanding the Mexican reaction to the unilateral U.S.
effort to curtail undocumented immigration; emigration from Mexico to the
United States has a longer history and a more solid natural basis than most
other instances of temporary migration.  The economies of Turkey and Germany,
to cite another instance of extensive temporary migration, are not as integrated
as are those of Mexico and the United States.  The very name used by the
Germans, guest workers, demonstrates that the invitation came from the
receiving country, which was also the case with the U.S. bracero program used
to recruit Mexican agricultural workers from 1942 to 1964.  Even when the
invitation was not explicit, as was the case with undocumented immigration from
Mexico, it was implicit.  Until 1986, it was not illegal to hire an undocumented
worker; the criminalization to which Jorge Bustamante refers in the headnote to
this chapter applied only to the immigrant.  There was a set of rules for
Mexican emigration to the United States and one aspect of these rules was that
Mexican workers were wanted and were expected to enter the United States
without papers; they would not be penalized beyond being permitted to depart
voluntarily if caught, to try again another day -- even the same day. 
   The migrants have motivations -- the main one is increasing their income. 
The sending country has motivations -- the main ones are to relieve employment
pressures and receive remittances to strengthen the balance of payments.  The
receiving countries have motivations --to provide labor that would not otherwise
be available, certainly not at the price requested by the immigrant workers.  The
migrant worker phenomenon thus affects all parties, and it is a system, not an
isolated act of migrants.
   The proposition put forth by many theorists who think in these terms is that
foreign workers, whether invited explicitly or tacitly through an elaborate set of
rules understood by all parties, take jobs with low social status that native
workers reject.  Status, as Piore argues, derives not from the jobs but from
the labor force, a necessary qualification since the so-called low-status jobs in
Germany included those on automobile assembly lines, which would have higher
status in the United States.   But this duality, jobs for natives and other jobs
for foreigners, does not stand up to close scrutiny.  The fact that the foreign
jobs differ among industrial countries demonstrates that status is something
created rather than inherent in the labor market, and what is created can be
altered.  Street cleaning is generally considered to be a low-status job, yet there
are numerous examples of excess native-worker applicants than jobs available
when the pay is high.  A more precise statement of the position that there are
jobs unwanted by native workers is that they are unwanted at the price -- the
wages and working conditions -- offered.  Status is as much an artifact of
income as it is of the job.
   Receiving countries have recruited foreign workers with low skills because
they are generally cheaper than native workers, or at least cheaper than
competing native workers would be if foreign workers were not available.  This
was the basis for permitting the immigration of undocumented Mexican workers. 
There are also hierarchical considerations for using Mexican workers since this
permits maintaining wage differentials within a work force without having to
raise the entire scale.  In other words, an alternative to the unwanted-jobs
thesis is the desire in receiving countries to keep costs down without prejudice
to most native workers.  If this is the correct interpretation of what was taking
place before Simpson-Rodino, it implies that some costs will increase if the
legislation is successful in curtailing undocumented immigration.
   The world's non-totalitarian states assume a basic right of individuals to
emigrate from the country of their residence, a position built into the Helsinki
agreement on European security and cooperation, and U.S. legislation links the
granting of most-favored-nation trade treatment to communist countries to their
permitting reasonable freedom to emigrate.  There is no recognized reciprocal
position that countries must admit emigrants from other places; this is decided
by each nation in the practice of its own sovereignty.  Some countries, like the
United States, are relatively generous in admitting immigrants, while others are
relatively restrictive, which is increasingly the case in Western Europe and the
tendency throughout the world is toward more restriction of immigration. 
Countries do not apparently believe they are being inconsistent in pressing for
freedom to emigrate while simultaneously limiting immigration.
   This general philosophic position is turned on its head in the U.S.-Mexican
situation.  Mexico certainly does not seek to limit emigration, and until Simpson-
Rodino, the United States did nothing effective to limit undocumented
immigration from Mexico.  The U.S. position has now changed, at least
legislatively.  Contrary to its position with respect to the Soviet Union, the
United States undoubtedly would now welcome Mexican moves that made
emigration of its nationals more difficult.  It is the Mexicans who assert that
this is not possible in a democracy.
   If there were no frontiers, migration of people would be vastly greater than
is now the case; and even now, movement of people numbers in the tens of
millions a year, largely without documents from the country of immigration.  In
a purely welfare sense, freedom of migration would lead to lower income
disparities among countries.  However, immigration restrictions are designed
precisely to maintain income disparities; more exactly, they are intended to
prevent an influx of low-wage labor from reducing incomes in the higher-income
country.
   In investigating the migration tension between Mexico and the United States,
it is useful to keep these self-interested objectives in mind.  The ability of its
nationals to work in the United States is seen by Mexico as a social and
economic benefit, at least as long as Mexico is unable to provide sufficient work
at a satisfactory wage at home for all who seek it.  The pressure for
immigration restriction  stems from a fear that unlimited immigration would alter
the social and economic status of persons already in the United States.  

The Facts as they are (Un)Known
   The search for objective facts about immigration from Mexico and other
countries was a necessary element in fashioning the Simpson-Rodino legislation,
although what emerged was a mixture of fact and compromises of different
opinions.  Now that the legislation exists and is being carried out, the type of
factual information needed has altered.  What was wanted before the legislation
was passed was information on how many persons were entering the United
States, with or without documentation, how long they stayed, and how they
affected the U.S. labor market and economy as a whole.  After the legislation
was enacted, the issues changed.  We now know that about 1.5 million persons
sought amnesty under the legislation, but it will take more time to know whether
the threat of penalties on employers who knowingly hire undocumented aliens
will curtail entries.    The hope of those who fashioned the legislation is that
most employers will obey the law.  
   The factual forest is well nigh impenetrable.  Focusing only on Mexico, the
kinds of question of fact that arise are the following: What is the pool from
which Mexican immigrants come?  Who comes?  Why do they come? How many
come?  What proportion is sojourners and what percentage will eventually
become permanent immigrants?  How many are here?  What is the effect on the
U.S. labor market?  On the Mexican labor market?  How is total U.S. income
affected by the presence of undocumented workers?  How much money do the
undocumented immigrants send home?  Will they continue to come if Mexican
incomes rise?  Will employer penalties stop them from coming?  How do the two
separate publics and governments feel about the immigration (emigration) of
undocumented Mexican workers?
   The discussion of these questions will be truncated in the interest of space,
and because a test is in progress under the current U.S. immigration legislation. 
This variety of questions will be dealt with under three headings: 1. What is the
pool from which Mexican immigrants come?  2. What are the effects of the
immigration (emigration) here (there)?  3. Is it possible to predict what measures
will work to encourage Mexicans to stay at home?
   The legislation will inevitably affect relations between the two countries.  If
the employer-penalty program succeeds in dissuading Mexicans from entering the
United States, the social and employment pressures in Mexico could affect
stability.  Mexicans without documents who hold jobs in the United States will
be reluctant to leave -- to make a round-trip to visit family as they did earlier
-- for fear they will be asked for documents when they return.  The labor
markets of the two countries, like the markets for goods and services, were
becoming integrated, and it remains to be seen whether U.S. restrictionism will
rupture this.

                             The Mexican Migrant Pool
   The size of the Mexican labor force, that is, those persons actively seeking
work, is not a settled matter.  Mexico's 1980 census estimated the labor force as
22 million in June of that year.  If the labor force has risen since then by
700,000 a year, a conservative figure, this would imply a labor force at the end
of 1987 of some 27 million.  But by general consensus, the 1980 census was
faulty and its data inconsistent with other estimates, particularly the continuing
survey of occupation carried out by the Secretariat of Programming and Budget
(SPP in its Spanish initials).  A year earlier, this showed the labor force at less
than 20 million.  On the other hand, if the increase in entrants into the labor
force is closer to one million a year, rather than 700,000, this still implies an
economically active population at the end of 1987 of about 27 million.  Using
projections made by SPP, the economically active population in the year 2000
will be between 35 and 40 million, depending on how many people voluntarily
stay out of the labor market.  The implication of these projections is that
Mexico will require consistent high overall growth rates in order to create
sufficient jobs; and even then, enough job creation to eliminate unemployment
and underemployment is unlikely.  
   If either unemployment or inadequate income because of involuntary
underemployment are forces propelling emigration, then the prospects for
reducing emigration pressures for the rest of this century are dim indeed.  The
American economist Clark Reynolds undertook an exercise projecting the Mexican
labor demand and supply and, depending on growth of GDP and the labor
intensity of production (that is, whether less capital-intensive production
techniques are used), concluded that the excess supply of labor in Mexico in the
year 2000 could either be eliminated or reach as high as 5.6 million.  The
Mexican economy has declined since that exercise was undertaken and it may
well be that the 5.6 million oversupply figure is low.  The growth in the
Mexican labor pool should start tapering off around the year 2000 because of the
decline in birth rates that have been apparent since the 1970s.
   One additional point should be made about the potential migrant pool.  The
participation rate in the labor force, measured as those aged 12 years and over,
has been declining modestly, but more or less consistently, for males during the
past 30 years, and in 1980 was estimated to be 71.3 percent -- the main reason
appears to be increased years in school.    However, the female participation
rate has been increasing; it was 21.5 percent in 1980.  The overall participation
rate, therefore, has remained steady at about 45 to 46 percent, and because of
the still low level of female participation in the labor force, one cannot expect a
slackening of the need to create jobs in the years ahead even if more schooling
continues to delay entry into the labor force.  The point of all this is that the
pressure to emigrate, as measured by raw numbers of those most likely to do so,
is unlikely to abate for at least the rest of this century.
   How many people leave Mexico each year, or at least did so before the
uncertainties created by the Simpson-Rodino legislation?  Some figures are
known.  In recent years, between 50,000 and 70,000 legal immigrants from Mexico
have been admitted each year.  It is clear that this figure is dwarfed by the
entry of Mexicans without documentation, but it is not known by how much.  
   Scholars have used a variety of techniques to estimate the flow of
undocumented aliens.  The most easily available figure is that for apprehensions
by the border patrol of the U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS). 
As can be seen from table 9.1, this figure reached almost 1.8 million in U.S.
fiscal year 1986.  The high percentage of Mexicans shown in the table, 95
percent, is a reflection of the concentration of the border patrol on the Mexican
border; it is generally believed that Mexicans make up between 50 and 60
percent of the annual flow of undocumented immigrants.   But the
apprehension figure is unreliable -- it gives a false impression that the
undocumented alien problem is overwhelmingly Mexican; it counts cases of
apprehension, not of different persons apprehended, and thus overstates when the
same person is apprehended more than once; it understates the undocumented
alien problem by the omission of most non-Mexicans; and it ignores many
Mexicans who enter the United States without being apprehended.   

            Table 9.1  Illegal Aliens Apprehended in the United States,
                            U.S. Fiscal Years 1951-1986
                              (Figures in thousands)


                        Aliens         Mexicans 
                        Located        Located         Percent Mexican

1951-19601                 360            344                95
1961-19701                 161            103                64
1971-19801                 832            747                90
1981                       976            874                90
1982                       970            887                91
1983                     1,251          1,172                94
1984                     1,247          1,171                94
1985                     1,349          1,267                94
1986                     1,767          1,671                95

Source:  Data obtained directly from the INS.

1Annual average


   In August 1978, a group of researchers from the Mexican Secretariat of Labor
(Secretaria de Trabajo y Prevision Social) stationed itself at the border locations
where the INS deposited undocumented Mexicans who had been apprehended and
it counted less than 33,000, compared with the INS figure that month of
89,000.  There is no satisfactory explanation of the discrepancy.  This same
research group interviewed returning migrants during a three-week period in
October-November 1977 and, with the help of data published by the INS on the
length of stay of deported aliens, was able to classify the persons by the year
they entered the United States.  Those who returned voluntarily were also
interviewed and classified by the year of entry to the United States.  Ratios
were determined for voluntary to involuntary departures from the United States. 
An estimate was also made of Mexicans who did not return, again based on data
published by the INS on the length of stay of expelled aliens.  The estimate of
undocumented entries from 1972 and 1976 was between 630,000 and 2 million a
year.  Most of these persons returned to Mexico and the net flow, equivalent to
the increase in the stock of undocumented Mexican immigrants who remain in
the United States, was estimated at between 50,000 and 160,000 a year.
   Flow and stock concepts merge and become inexact when calculating figures
over long periods of time.  Much of the literature uses a different terminology,
sojourner or settler.  The figures for the number of Mexicans who have settled
in the United States after first entering without documents is no more certain
than the gross flow each year, but there are better techniques to make the
estimates, and in addition, an effort was made to catch this group in the 1980
U.S. census.   
   The U.S. Bureau of the Census estimated in the 1980 census that there were
roughly two million undocumented aliens in the United States, of whom 55
percent were born in Mexico.  After revising the estimate to include persons
not captured in the census count, the Census Bureau estimate of undocumented
aliens in the United States in 1980 was between 2.5 and 3.5 million, of whom 1.5
to 2.0 million were estimated to be Mexicans.  The net flow since 1980 was
estimated to be between 100,000 and 300,000 a year.  Putting all these figures
together gives a range of between 3.2 and 5.6 million undocumented aliens in the
United States at the end of 1987, of whom between 1.9 and 3.2 million were
Mexicans.  
   Of the undocumented Mexicans estimated from the census count, only 9
percent were over age 40 -- table 9.2 also shows the relative youth of native
Mexicans who entered the United States from 1980 to 1986 compared with other
foreign-born residents.  This relatively young population can be expected to be
quite prolific and increase the proportion of Mexican-origin population in the
United States in the years to come, a point of some significance for the future
ethnic composition of the U.S. population, as we will discuss shortly. 

                 Table 9.2  Age of Mexican and Other Foreign-Born
                     Population Who Entered the United States
                                  from 1980-1986
                              (Figures in thousands)

                               Foreign-Born    Mexican-Born
                                Population      Population

Totals                           4,430            965
Ages (Percent of Totals)
  6-14 years                        17.8           21.7
  15-29 years                       43.5           57.5
  30-44 years                       24.9           15.4
  45 years and older                13.9            5.4

  29 years and younger              61.3           80.2

Source:  Karen A. Woodrow, Jeffrey S. Passel, and Robert Warren,
   "Recent Immigration to the United States--Legal and Un-
   documented:  Analysis of Data from the June 1986 Current
   Population Survey."

  The Census Bureau estimate is not necessarily the final word on the stock of
undocumented aliens in the United States since different researchers have come
to varying conclusions.  However, the consensus estimates for the stock of
undocumented aliens in the United States in 1980 were in the range of 3 to 5
million, between 50 and 60 percent Mexican, even before the census estimate. 
There is less agreement on the net flow since 1980 because the period coincides
with a time of severe economic hardship in Mexico (and turbulence in other
migrant-sending areas, especially Central America), which almost certainly
affected the scope and nature of migration to the United States.  
    The IRCA legislation deals with this duality -- flow-stock, gross flow-net
flow, or sojourner-settler, however labeled -- in linked fashion.  The employer-
penalty provisions were intended to curtail the gross flow, and the amnesty
clauses to deal compassionately with the stock resulting from earlier flows.  But
there were derogations from both features reflecting the compromises necessary
to get the bill through the Congress and then signature by the President; and, as
will be noted later, not all of these were felicitous. 

                           Effects of Mexican Migration
   The movement of Mexicans to the United States, whether as sojourners or
settlers, affects the United States, Mexico, and the relationship between the two
countries.  These effects are most readily analyzed by separately examining
economic, social, and political outcomes, but in reality they form a seamless web. 
Some effects are reasonably clear.  The ability of Mexicans to emigrate did ease
social pressures in Mexico; and the availability of foreign workers did permit the
harvesting of perishable crops at the lowest possible cost to growers and
consumers.  Other effects are more speculative.
    Most U.S. economists, including the U.S. Council of Economic Advisers, as
cited in the headnote to this chapter, believe that the availability of alien labor,
clandestine though it was, raised the growth rate of the U.S. economy as a
whole.  They reason straightforwardly that the presence of relatively cheap
labor raised returns to other factors of production -- capital, land, and other
labor complementary to the undocumented labor, particularly labor with higher
skills.  At times of full employment, a labor shortage can be a bottleneck to
overall growth, but even at times of high unemployment, labor supply may be
inadequate at the price offered in particular activities -- such as crop
harvesting, production of some items of apparel, and working in restaurant
kitchens.  To the extent that the availability of alien labor keeps wages below
what they otherwise would be, consumers of products made or harvested with
this labor benefit.
   There are distributional effects of the use of foreign labor.  Farm owners
producing perishable crops benefit while native workers migrating around the
country to pick fruits and vegetables are losers.  Native workers who clean
dishes in restaurants do not benefit from the employment of alien workers,
whereas restaurant owners do.  Skilled workers higher in a firm hierarchy are
likely to benefit from the presence of alien workers, whereas competing workers
at the same hierarchical level are unlikely to benefit.  However, when the total
GNP is rising, there may be trickle-down benefits even to those workers in
direct competition with the alien workers.  These benefits are apt to disappear,
especially for competing workers, when growth in the overall economy falters.  
   It is no accident, therefore, that the pressure for restriction becomes most
intense at times of a stagnant or declining economy.  This was true in the
United States during the great depression, and the clamor against guest-worker
programs in Europe peaked when economic growth slowed and unemployment rose
after the first oil crisis in 1973-1974.  The same restrictionist sentiment took
hold in the United States during the recession of the late 1970s. Desultory
economic growth in Western Europe for most of the past decade has contributed
to the durability of the restrictionist sentiment there.
   Several efforts have been made to measure the impact on the U.S. labor
market of the presence of foreign workers, both legal immigrants and
undocumented aliens.  This is more easily done for legal immigrants since their
fortunes can be traced over time.  The impact of undocumented aliens on the
U.S. labor market, particularly of competing labor, is more conjectural.  
   Legal immigrants who have been in the United States for upwards of ten
years earn higher wages than comparable native workers.  Several authors have
entered a cautionary note, however.  Recent immigrants tend to come with fewer
skills and fewer years of schooling than did earlier ones and their economic
progress may not prove to be comparable.  This is particularly true of Mexican
immigrants, who have an average of 7.5 years of schooling compared with more
than 11 years for other Hispanics and whites.
   A caveat is worth entering to this concern about lesser schooling and skill
levels of recent immigrants.  Restrictionist arguments that relatively unskilled
and unschooled immigrants will become public charges have a long history, dating
back to Italian and Irish immigrants in the 19th century, Jewish immigrants at
the turn of this century, and unschooled Asian immigrants following the end of
the Viet Nam War.  The results proved otherwise, however.  
   The question of economic progress over time does not arise for undocumented
immigrant sojourners, since they come and go.  The illegality of undocumented
immigrant settlers makes their economic progress problematic; and in any event
precise time-series data are not readily available as a consequence of the
illegality.  
   Sojourners came and then came again and again because they earned more
money in the United States than in Mexico.  The germane labor-market question
about them is not how well they do, but how they affect wages in the United
States, not for labor as a whole, but for those with whom they are in
competition at the lower end of the labor market.  If it is accepted that under
normal economic conditions the economy as a whole benefits from the presence
of undocumented workers and that skilled workers also benefit in a hierarchical
structure, then the most important unresolved issue is the distributional one. 
   How do those national workers at the bottom of the income scale, or those
who are unemployed, fare from the presence of large numbers of undocumented
workers?  There is no easy answer to this question.  Vernon Briggs believes that
the persons hurt are minorities, those most vulnerable to competition from low-
wage workers who do not have the ability to complain about their treatment, and
argues that there should be more conscious coordination between immigration and
labor policies, which translates into restrictionism.    Borjas and Tienda
concluded that the effect of undocumented workers on native wage rates is
minuscule, negative by at most a fraction of 1 percent, but that the wages of
resident foreign workers is reduced by 2 to 9 percent.  Bean, Lowell, and
Taylor similarly concluded that there is no evidence undocumented Mexican
workers depress the earnings of native-born U.S. workers, and even argue that if
there is any effect, it is slightly positive for native workers.  They also accept
the thesis that undocumented aliens take jobs that natives do not want. 
Muller and Espenshade find some evidence, although not overwhelming, of wage
depression in California from undocumented immigrants.
   One reason for these inconclusive findings is that the underlying data to
examine the specific consequences of undocumented immigration are problematic. 
In addition, a meticulous examination of labor-market impact requires a number
of rigid assumptions on the homogeneity of labor, its mobility to take advantage
of wage differentials, the short-term versus the long-term consequences, the
price at which producers might substitute labor for capital and vice versa, and
what happens in specific regions and industries as opposed to looking at labor as
a whole.  Since undocumented aliens are unevenly distributed among the states,
their impact on labor markets must vary among the regions.
   Wage depression or enhancement for competing workers is a less significant
outcome than job displacement.  Do undocumented alien workers actually displace
legally-resident workers?  Answering this more important question is equally
speculative.  It is not too much of a simplification to classify students of
undocumented immigration as being either job-creation or job-displacement
advocates.  Job-creationists argue that undocumented foreign workers remove
production bottlenecks.  A framer on a construction job opens opportunities for
bricklayers, roofers, carpenters, and others; those who harvest fresh fruits and
vegetables open opportunities for canners, jobbers, wholesalers, retailers; a cutter
in a garment shop is necessary if those who sew the garments, iron them, and
then work in the distribution network are to have jobs.  There is no single lump
of labor that exists in the United States, but rather a complex, interrelated
chain; and each link is necessary for the entire chain to fit together.  
   The opposite view, that of job displacement, grants the chain or network
logic but argues that there is no shortage of legal workers to fill the jobs taken
by undocumented aliens.  This view is that the undocumented worker is hired
mainly to keep wages down and, at a time of high unemployment among unskilled
workers, this translates into job displacement.  
   The U.S. General Accounting Office examined much literature on this theme
and came up with a qualified conclusion: illegal aliens "appear" to displace native
workers; their synthesis of the 46 studies examined "suggests" widespread
displacement, but displacement, like wage depression, is itself a qualified concept,
dependent on the state of the U.S. economy, the region of the United States
being examined, and the activity in question.  However -- and this is the same
point made for wage depression -- the germane question is the distributional one. 
The jobs that might be displaced are those at the lower end of the wage scale. 
If bottlenecks are removed, the beneficiaries are likely to be persons with
greater incomes than the unskilled labor used to remove the production
impediments.  
   Perhaps the most significant long-term implication of immigration into the
United States from Mexico, and increasingly from other Latin American
countries, is that it is changing the ethnic mix of many states.  The Latin
American- and Spanish-origin population of the United States grew from 9.1 to
14.6 million from 1970 to 1980; this 60 percent growth was five times that of the
total population.  The Mexican-origin population grew by 93 percent over that
period, or eight times the growth of the total population, and five states,
Arizona, California, Colorado, New Mexico and Texas held almost 85 percent of
the Mexican-origin population in the United States in 1980.  The main reasons
for this rapid growth were immigration and fertility, which each accounted for
about half of the increase.  Some 86 percent of the undocumented Mexicans who
enter the United States are under age 34, which implies that procreation of this
group will continue to be higher than for the U.S. population as a whole.
   What has been happening, therefore, is not merely an economic phenomenon
affecting the U.S. labor force, but a lasting change flowing from immigration,
clandestine and open, from Mexico.  The social structure of many states is
changing and the higher fertility rate of Mexican- and other Latin American-
origin population assures continued rapid Hispanisation of these and other states. 
This is a pattern that occurred earlier in the United States with other ethnic
groups and they left their mark on U.S. habits, including the political direction
of many municipalities and states and of the federal government.  Hispanics are
rapidly becoming the largest minority in the United States and those of Mexican
origin the largest single group among them.  This is the most durable form of
integration of two countries.
      The economic effects of migration for Mexico relate to the labor market
there and the dollars sent back by the migrants in the United States.  As is true
for the United States, the consequences of the ethnic integration between the
two countries will probably prove to be the most durable effect for Mexico. 
Mexicans are ambivalent about emigration, seeing no escape from the human
movement under current population and employment pressures, but also feeling a
sense of national degradation from this necessity.  
   This inner conflict between necessity and preference emerges in the fuzziness
of the public discussion of the emigration issue.  The Mexican position
encompasses recognition of the U.S. sovereign right to restrict entry, but also a
running commentary in the press and even the Mexican Congress about the
wrongheadedness of the restriction.  There is an admission that emigrants leave
for personal advantage, but there are also regular attacks on the United States
for maltreatment of the emigrants.  Mexicans often assert the need to reach
understandings on migration in a bilateral framework, but then during the debate
on Simpson-Rodino, the Mexican government ignored U.S. suggestions that the
two countries discuss the issue.
   Gregory has estimated the wage impact in Mexico of the emigration,
concluding that emigration suspension would depress wages by 3 to 4 percent in
low-skill occupations.    This conclusion is at best an approximation, assuming
price elasticities for the supply and demand for labor which are at best
speculative and implicitly treating Mexico as one large labor market when in
reality the country is a series of labor markets, each with different conditions.
   There are no reliable data on remittances sent home by Mexican immigrants
in the United States.  Diez-Canedo sought to calculate this based on data
supplied by U.S. banks and came to a figure of $317 million in 1975.  Official
balance-of-payments data show net transfers into Mexico in 1986 of $500 million,
and slightly more in 1987.  The figure is undoubtedly higher than this, but trying
to state how much higher would be sheer guesswork.

                           The Difficulty of Prediction
   One of the most interesting findings of Mexican researchers is that it is not
the very poorest who emigrate.  One survey found that only 3.2 percent of the
emigrants were unemployed in the month prior to leaving Mexico.  Eight of ten
migrants were employed in the month prior to emigrating, and the remainder was
not in the labor market.  This corroborates what other researchers have
discovered, that those who emigrate clandestinely are not the poorest
Mexicans.  There are a number of explanations for this.  It takes money to
emigrate, thereby mostly excluding the unemployed.  And as a person's income
rises, his appetite for still more income is whetted.  As incomes rise, so do
aspirations and horizons.
   There is an analytical corollary to this finding -- as Mexican wages rise,
emigration may increase temporarily, implying that increased employment in
Mexico is unlikely to have much deterrent effect on emigration in the short
term, say, for the rest of this century.  Over a longer term, if incomes in
Mexico continue to rise, emigration will eventually decline.  
   The Mexican authorities are deeply concerned about the potential impact of
the IRCA legislation and often ask U.S. interlocutors familiar with the
immigration theme whether the United States is likely to seriously enforce the
employer-penalty provisions.  This is immediately followed by a query as to
whether the U.S. authorities have calculated the damage that would be inflicted
on Mexico if the clandestine traffic is effectively closed.  A common Mexican
attitude is that the undocumented flow of Mexicans, while messy and outside
U.S. law, has served both countries well and that the consequences of curtailing
the flow could bring real hardships to Mexico. 
   The dialogue between the Mexican and the United States governments deals
largely with political issues, such as the respective national positions toward
Central America; social matters, such as the drug traffic; and, overwhelmingly,
economic matters, such as trade and foreign direct investment.  Migration
matters, which may be more important than any of these, rarely get discussed. 
Unless the two countries were to agree to a new bracero agreement under which
workers would be hired, under government sanction, for temporary work in the
United States, there is little to discuss.  But, a new government-to-government
agreement of this nature would be highly controversial in Mexico; it would be
portrayed as selling Mexican workers, cheaply, to gringo employers, and is
unlikely to materialize.
   There is a school of thought in both countries, however, that the Mexican
workers will be increasingly needed in the United States.  Clark Reynolds, in a
series of essays, has projected the supply and demand for unskilled labor in both
countries and concluded that there will be complementarities between them -- an
excess supply in Mexico and an excess demand in the United States.  The
recommendation coming from these projections is that the labor market of the
two countries should be further integrated, by specific agreement or otherwise.  
   These projections, like all such exercises, build in assumptions, some explicit
and others implicit.  Perhaps the most important of these is that U.S.
productivity will grow between now and the year 2000 by 1 percent a year.  If
the growth is greater, the need for a given number of workers to achieve a
given growth in GNP is reduced.  The Reynolds exercise leaves U.S. GNP growth
as the residual, or the variable to be determined; that is, a shortage of unskilled
labor will lead to lower growth.  Productivity could be the residual, however.
Fewer available unskilled workers could lead to their more efficient use.  Also, a
global figure for productivity growth is misleading.  According to the U.S.
Bureau of Labor Statistics, productivity growth in the United States during the
1980s (1979-1985) was more than 3 percent a year for manufacturing but less
than 1 percent a year overall.  It is unclear in which sector of the economy
Mexican workers are believed to be needed by those who foresee a shortage of
low-skill labor in the United States in the 1990s. 
   The labor complementarity theme has become an article of faith among many
Mexican analysts, who conclude that the United States is doing Mexico no favor
by accepting undocumented workers, but is instead meeting U.S. needs.  There
undoubtedly is a mutuality of interest, else the migration would not have been as
durable as it has been, and this mutuality explains why the United States has
not until now vigorously carried out its immigration laws.  It explains, also, why
even Simpson-Rodino makes a large exception to the general rules on amnesty
and undocumented workers in favor of U.S. agriculture.  What is omitted from
the Mexican calculus, however, is that public opinion in the United States
opposes hiring foreign workers; the Mexican analysis also ignores the potential
distributional impact of undocumented workers in the United States.  If there is
damage from their use, whether wage depression or displacement, the impact will
be on those least able to cope.
   The curtailment of undocumented immigration could also lead to political
instability in Mexico, something in neither country's interest.  But this is
uncertain. If Gregory's calculations are even close to correct, abrupt curtailment
of emigration of low-skilled workers will lead to a once-and-for-all wage
reduction among this group of 3 to 4 percent, but Mexican workers have
suffered real wage reduction since 1982 that totals ten times this amount.  On
the other hand, curtailment of emigration would affect a self-selected group of
adventurous young persons, who might instead turn their energies to internal
agitation.  The answer to this question will emerge if the employer-penalty
provisions of IRCA effectively curtail undocumented immigration from Mexico,
but the United States may prefer not to know the answer.

Policy -- Separate and Asymmetrical
   It may be useful to summarize the internal contradictions of the migration
debate in each of the countries.  The reason for the long delay in enacting
Simpson-Rodino was the tug between the majority, at least as measured in
public-opinion polls, who wished to curtail undocumented immigration, and a
number of vocal minorities, including Hispanic organizations and employer groups
opposed to the employer-penalty provisions, who preferred the messy status quo
under which undocumented aliens were entering the United States.   These
otherwise incompatible sectors of U.S. society made common cause for many
years against legislation affecting undocumented immigrants.  Indeed, the
legislation was finally enacted only after special provisions were included
catering to agricultural growers.
   Seasonal agriculture has always been treated as a special case for importation
of foreign workers.  There has always been a problem with this in that Mexicans
may enter the United States to work in agriculture but then drift into other,
higher-paying occupations, leaving the agricultural-worker pool in need of
constant replenishment.  Using data from the 1980 census, only 17 percent of
undocumented Mexican workers were engaged in agriculture, compared with 35
percent in manufacturing, 11 percent in construction, and the remainder, close to
37 percent,  in various service activities.
   Another compromise that made enactment of Simpson-Rodino possible was the
amnesty program.  Under the legislation, only those undocumented aliens who
could demonstrate that they have lived continuously in the United States since
January 1, 1982 were eligible for adjustment of status.  Since the formal
procedures for granting amnesty did not begin until May 1987, this meant that
migrants who had become settlers over the previous five and one-half year
period were ineligible.  The compromise was beneficial to the more than 1.5
million persons who qualified and terrifying to hundreds of thousands of persons,
perhaps millions, who do not.
   This backdating to 1982 affects more than Mexicans.  Jose Napoleon Duarte,
the President of El Salvador, requested a delay in the forced departure of what
he estimated were hundreds of thousands of Salvadorans who entered the United
States after January 1, 1982, reasoning that El Salvador could not cope with this
sudden influx.  His request was rejected.
   Now that IRCA exists, however, the proper question to ask is how different
policies on its implementation can affect outcomes.  Are there other policies
unrelated to Simpson-Rodino that can affect migration outcomes?
   One such policy relates to family reunification.  The evidence is clear that
undocumented aliens who have become settlers are not merely young, single
males.  Most of them live in households with spouses and children.  Some
members of these families are legally in the United States and others not; some
qualified for amnesty, others did not.  Many persons may not have applied for
amnesty for fear of family separation.  A critical issue, therefore, will be the
action taken by the United States to reunite families separated by the way the
amnesty law was written.  One of the tenets of U.S. immigration law generally is
to encourage the unification of families; and there was cruel irony that an
amnesty law based on humanitarian grounds did lead to some family separation.
   There are two main techniques for preventing the entry of undocumented
aliens.  The traditional method is through the border patrol concentrated on the
Mexican border; the innovation in Simpson-Rodino is the penalties against
employers who knowingly hire undocumented aliens.  The seriousness of U.S.
intent to enforce the new law can be judged over time by the budgets
appropriated for the INS, particularly the border patrol, and the vigor with
which employers who violate the law are penalized.  The expectation of
persons familiar with past U.S. enforcement of immigration laws is that this one
will not be vigorously enforced either, that the INS will continue to be
underfunded and that there will be reluctance to seek fines and other
punishments of employer violators.  But it is by no means certain that the
employer-penalty provisions of IRCA will be enforced in a lax way.  Here
implementation can make a big difference; the U.S. immigration door can be kept
half open, as it has been for some time, or it can be mostly shut to persons
without legal papers to enter.  
   The ideal situation, if the United States does not wish undocumented workers
and Mexico would prefer that they not have to leave, is for Mexico to provide
gainful employment, at decent wages, to all who seek it.  This is a long-term
ideal and Mexico's economic policy obviously affects the level of employment. 
Can U.S. economic policy have much effect in maximizing job creation in
Mexico?  At the margin, the answer is undoubtedly yes.  U.S. trade
protectionism can frustrate job creation in competitive Mexican industries.  As
Mexican President Lopez Portillo once stated, the United States can
take either Mexican goods or its people; it cannot keep out both.  U.S. aid
provided through multilateral institutions such as the World Bank and the Inter-
American Development Bank can stimulate Mexican economic and social progress,
and investment by U.S. firms can create jobs.
   More important, perhaps, than any of these conscious measures, are U.S.
policy decisions that affect Mexico by inadvertence.  These relate to U.S.
macroeconomic policy, which affects interest rates and the rate of growth in the
U.S. economy, which in turn have profound repercussions in Mexico.
   It is useful to repeat, however, what was noted earlier -- these admonitions,
valid though they are, are prescriptions for the long-term alleviation of
emigration pressures from Mexico, not for short-term curtailment.  The short-
term effect of modestly higher incomes in Mexico is likely to be increased
emigration.  As has been evident throughout the period since World War II,
Mexicans emigrate, mostly as sojourners, when incomes rise and in even greater
numbers as economic conditions at home worsen.  Economic development that
leads to curtailed emigration will be a long-term process.
   Mexico's most durable problem, as well as its most valuable asset, is its
population.  The tragedy of emigration is that those who leave, either for short
periods or for good, include many of Mexico's most adventurous young people, 
precisely the citizens a country wants to keep at home.  The motivations of all
those who leave are not the same, but large-scale emigration is a symptom of
lack of opportunity in Mexico.
   Between now and the end of the century Mexico will have to create 10 to 12
million jobs, almost half again as many jobs as now exist.  Mexico's annual need
for job creation is almost as high in absolute terms as that of the United States
with three times Mexico's population.  Even when economic growth was
averaging 6 percent a year for a quarter of a century, Mexico was unable to
create jobs at a pace to provide employment to all seekers.  So even with
economic recovery and sustained economic growth, the size of the problem is
beyond Mexico's capacity to cure in the short to medium term.
   Migration is one of the most intractable issues between Mexico and the
United States.  It is driven by disparate economic conditions in the two
countries, a situation which cannot be altered in the short term.  The migratory
process has gone on for so long that it has conditioned the way individuals and
families live.  The economy of each country is deeply affected by whatever
practice is followed, and each country will have difficulty in coping with changes
in practices.  It can be argued whether the U.S. economy as a whole can adjust
without damage to its economic growth without a large flow of undocumented
foreign workers.  It is quite clear, however, that Mexico will be unable to
satisfy all new entrants into the labor force over the next decade and beyond
and it is anybody's guess how the society will be affected if the emigration
escape valve is effectively closed.  This difference in impact -- significant but not crucial for the United States,
but perhaps vital for Mexico -- is another example of the asymmetry between
the two countries.  
Notes