






                                     CHAPTER 6

                                        Oil



   Considering that ... the petroleum companies were ordered to
impose new working conditions ...and made known their rejection of
the award, despite its having been recognized as constitutional by a
judgment of the Supreme Court of the Nation...this carries as a
necessary consequence the application of fraction XXI of article 123 of
the General Constitution of the Republic ...it is declared expropriated
for reason of public interest and in favor of the nation the machinery,
installations, buildings, pipelines, refineries, storage tanks, roadways,
tank cars, distribution stations, ships, and all other goods and real
property of (names of companies).  President Lazaro Cardenas,
petroleum expropriation decree, March 19, 1938.

   The 1938 takeover was the culmination not only of the reform
process set in motion at Queretaro (relating to the 1917 constitution)
twenty-one years earlier, but also to a certain extent of the Mexican
Revolution itself.  Lorenzo Meyer, 1972.  

   The development policy adopted by our country reaffirms that we
must avoid the petrolization of the economy and this signifies that
structural change in energy must march to the rhythm of the
structural change of the entire society and that, in the long term, the
sector should lose relative weight in an economy that is more
diversified, more modern,and more efficiently linked to the exterior.
National Energy Program, 1984-1988.


Oil: The Changing Constant
   National values, conditioned by a particular history, play a large role in
policy determination of all countries.  The checks and balances built into the
U.S. political structure can be inefficient when the need for a decision is urgent,
yet no branch of the government would explicitly advocate their elimination. 
They are too deeply embedded in the U.S. belief of how a government should be
run.
   Mexican history has features just as deeply embedded in the national psyche
as are U.S. checks and balances.  The most important of these is noninterference
in the internal affairs of other countries.  This aspect of Mexican nationalism is
an outgrowth of experience with the United States.  Like U.S. checks and
balances, there have been violations of the noninterference concept, such as
withdrawal of recognition from the Somoza regime in Nicaragua while it was still
in power, but these departures do not destroy the principle as it affects
relations with the United States.  
   National control over Mexico's petroleum resources is comparable in its
psychological and practical significance to U.S. separation of powers -- it is
taken as a given that brooks no argument.  National control over oil resources
could not be set aside even if this seemed temporarily advantageous; the thought
itself would not occur.  "Since 1938, petroleum and Pemex have symbolized the
essences of nationalism: national dignity, economic independence, and state
sovereignty."  The import of the Mexican attitude toward oil is not always
grasped in the United States and this has led to policy errors.  
   Oil has been both a blessing and a curse to Mexico.  Oil provided resources
for the nation's development, but it also was the lightning rod for foreign
interference, and oil was the basis for some of the most egregious indignities
inflicted on Mexico by the United States.  The best known public example was
the Bucareli agreements of 1923 under which Mexico was forced to make
concessions to U.S. oil interests in return for U.S. recognition of the government
of President Alvaro Obregon.  The day-to-day control of a nonrenewable
resource by foreign interests was inherently unpopular in Mexico, as it has been
in country after country.  (This is the essence of the citation from Lorenzo
Meyer at the head of this chapter.)  It was the history of being treated as an
inferior even more than the economics of who benefited most from Mexican oil
resources that made the 1938 expropriation so popular. 
   Mexican oil production prior to the expropriation had peaked in the 1920s. 
By 1938 the "foreign oil properties were in a state of abandon, their reserves
depleted, equipment run down, and Mexican management and technical personnel
nonexistent."  Daily crude production increased steadily but modestly in the
decades following the expropriation but the combination of increasing
consumption and lack of discovery of important new fields led to a decline in
the ratio of reserves to production from 28 years in 1938 to 18 years in 1970. 
Mexico was a net oil importer in the early 1970s.
   This all changed in the mid-1970s after Mexico found vast oil resources,
particularly in the Tabasco-Campeche basin in the southern part of the country. 
Mexico was transformed from an oil-dependent economy to a leading producer
and exporter.  The foreign-exchange earnings and tax revenue from oil became
an important component of Mexico's development plans -- indeed, too important
in that other aspects of Mexico's economic structure were ignored.  When oil
prices fell in 1981, this high dependence turned the oil bonanza of the late 1970s
into the debt horror that Mexico has had to face ever since.  Mexico has
learned from this experience; planning for the future contemplates a decline in
the importance of oil in the context of the total economy.  However, continued
tax revenue and foreign exchange receipts from oil production and exports must
be part of the solution to the nation's unhappy 1980s.  
   This chapter will discuss, first, the ups and downs of oil in the Mexican
economy since the mid-1970s, or more precisely, past and present production
levels, pricing, and trade policy.  The political basis of oil decisions will then be
analyzed, with special emphasis on the relations with the United States, including
the U.S. interest in Mexican energy policy.  The final section will speculate
about the future Mexican-U.S. oil relationship.

The Ups and Downs of Oil
   The U.S. Department of Energy (the Energy Information Administration, or
EIA) made the estimates shown in table 6.1 of Mexico's oil resources as of
January 1, 1982.  Proved reserves were defined in the study as remaining
producible oil as of that date under operating practices then in effect; they
include estimated recoverable oil in undrilled portions of known structures. 
Additional reserves refer to crude oil that might be extracted by secondary
recovery or pressure maintenance operations in reservoirs not then using those
techniques.  Estimates of additional recoverable oil are based on continuous
probability distribution curves for undiscovered oil.  
   The key figures in the EIA estimate are the 30 billion barrels of remaining
recoverable oil from known deposits, the 38.8 billion barrels of ultimate
recoverable oil from known deposits, and the total undiscovered recoverable oil
with an estimated statistical mean value of 76.2 billion barrels.  Together, the
last two figures constitute the estimated 115 billion barrels of total recoverable
oil.   
   The figures with the highest probability of accuracy are those from known
deposits, the 30 and roughly 39 billion barrel estimates of currently and
ultimately recoverable oil.  These figures are on the conservative side.  The
Mexicans estimated their proven reserves as of the end of 1985 at 48.6 billion 
barrels, a figure that was essentially unchanged a year later.  A similar figure,
49.3 billion barrels, was the estimate of Mexican oil reserves as of January 1, 
                    Table 6.1  Mexico's Estimated Oil Resources
                               as of January 1, 1982
                               (Billions of barrels)


Known Resources

   Original oil in place                                    193.0
   Proved ultimate recovery                                  36.0
   Cumulative production                                      8.8
   Proved oil reserves                                       27.2
   Indicated additional reserves                              2.8
   Total known ultimate recovery                             38.8
   Remaining recoverable oil                                 30.0


Undiscovered resources1

   Original oil in place                                    305.0
   Recoverable oil                                           76.22

Total recoverable oil                                       115.0


Source:  William D. Dietzman, et al., The Petroleum Resources of Mexico, p. x.

   1The statistical mean value occurs at the 38 percent probability level.

   2Assuming an average recovery efficiency of 25 percent.


1986, published by the U.S. Department of Energy in its International Energy
Annual 1985.
   Based on the data published in the U.S. Department of Energy annual report
for 1985, Mexico ranks fourth in the world in crude oil reserves, after Saudi
Arabia, Kuwait, and the Soviet Union.  Mexico's crude oil reserves at the
beginning of 1986 were 7 percent of the estimated world total.  Those of the
United States, by contrast, were 4 percent (28.4 billion barrels).  Mexico still
ranks among the world's leading countries for oil reserves, although not as high
if the more conservative EIA estimates are used.    Table 6.2 shows Mexico's oil-producing regions by proven reserves. The first
discovery in what is now Mexico's most important oil-producing area, the
Tabasco-Campeche basin, was made only in 1960 and the biggest years for
subsequent discoveries were 1976 and 1977.  As a result, while this area contains
the bulk of Mexico's proven and recoverable reserves, it has not provided the
largest proportion of oil produced in Mexico.  That honor goes to the Tampico-
Tuxpan embayment which has provided about half the total amount of oil
produced in Mexico since 1901.  The EIA estimates that these two areas together
account for about 95 percent of Mexico's proven oil reserves.  Pemex, while it
gives a larger absolute figure, also estimates that 95 percent of Mexico's proven
oil reserves are situated in these two areas.
   The large crude oil discoveries in the Tabasco-Campeche basin stimulated a
debate rooted in the Mexican national historical experience.  The issues were not
merely how much to produce for national use and how much for export, which is
the kind of debate one would expect after a large oil discovery in any country,
but also how these decisions would affect Mexican dependency on the United
States.  The issues, therefore, were partly technical -- the durability of oil
reserves at different levels of production and the impact of production and
exports on the national economy and the balance of payments; and they were
partly rooted in past national experience -- whether excessive exports to the 
United States would lead to even more economic integration than already existed. 
   The "nationalist-conservationist" position dominated the debate until the close
of the Echeverria administration at the end of 1976, despite the growing
evidence that the new finds were significant.  The extreme form of this 
position eased during  the Lopez Portillo administration, stimulated largely by
the need to correct the large deficit in the current account of the balance of 
              Table 6.2  Proved Reserves of Mexico's Main Oil Regions
                              (as of January 1, 1982)

                                        Millions of barrels  Percent of total

Tabasco-Campeche basin 
   Includes:  Reforma area and
        Gulf of Campeche                       19,329             72

Tampico-Tuxpan embayment
   Includes:  Ebano-Panuco area,
   Golden Lane reef, Tamabra belt
   or trend, Chicontepec paleocanal,
   and San Andres area                          5,916             22

Isthmus of Tehuantepec
   Includes Saline and Macuspana
   subbasins                                    1,124              4

Veracruz (or Papaloapan) basin                    183              1

Burgos basin                                      129              -

Sabinas basin                                      20              -

Totals                                         26,7111           100

Source:  See table 6.1, pp. 16-26.

- Less than 1 percent.

1The difference between this figure and the 27.2 billion barrels of proved
  reserves shown in table 6.1 is presumably the omission of certain fields
  in the material presented in the source.
payments.  The position eventually adopted in 1980 was for Mexico to have a
flexible production platform of 2.5 to 2.7 million barrels of crude oil per day, of
which 1.5 million barrels, plus or minus 10 percent, were for export.  In order
to deal with the dependency issue, no more than 50 percent of crude oil exports
were to be shipped to any single country (that is, the United States) and Mexico
would not provide more than 20 percent of the external crude oil needs of any
country.  In order to avoid the petrolization of the country (or to use the word
then in vogue in Mexico, the Venezuelization), no more than 50 percent of
foreign-exchange earnings were to come from petroleum exports. 
   Table 6.3 gives data on Mexican crude oil production since 1901.  The table
shows that the overall production target of between 2.5 and 2.7 million barrels a
day has been adhered to since production reached that level in 1982.  Mexico
has also largely adhered to its target of limiting exports of crude oil to the
United States to 50 percent of the total, give or take 10 percent.  Table 6.4,
which shows this, also shows that the proportion of crude oil exports to the
United States in the years prior to the 50 percent decision was substantially
higher.  
   Mexico failed, however, to avoid the petrolization of the economy, a failure
most evident in its merchandise exports.  Crude oil and petroleum products began
a steady climb as a proportion of Mexico's total exports as crude production
attained its targeted level in the Tabasco-Campeche basin, reaching a peak of 78
percent in 1982.  As can be seen in table 6.5, there was a decline in subsequent
years in the petroleum portion of total merchandise exports.  The sharp drop to
39 percent of the total in 1986 came from a combination of a decline in volume
exported, lower prices, and a diversification into other exports; the value of
manufactured exports increased by a substantial 43 percent over 1985. 

                Table 6.3  Mexican Crude Oil Production, 1901-1986
                              (thousands of barrels)


                                Yearly Total      Daily Average

1901-19101                            1,229              3
1911-19201                           51,776            142
1921-19301                          101,166            277
1931-19401                           39,163            107
1941-19501                           49,130            135
1951-19601                           86,799            238
1961-19701                          131,017            359
1971                                155,911            427
1972                                161,367            441
1973                                164,909            452
1974                                209,855            576
1975                                261,589            717
1976                                293,117            801
1977                                358,090            981
1978                                442,607          1,213
1979                                536,566          1,470
1980                                708,593          1,936
1981                                844,241          2,313
1982                              1,003,084          2,748
1983                                981,222          2,688
1984                              1,024,341          2,799
1985                                960,114          2,630
1986                                886,092          2,428


Sources:  Dietzman, et al., 1901-1970, pp. 14-15; Pemex, Anuario
   Estadistico 1985, 1971-1984, p. 37; Pemex, Memoria de Labores,
   annual reports for 1984, 1985, and 1986.

Note:  The production figures in Dietzman, et al, and Pemex's
   Anuario Estadistico 1985 are close to each other for most
   years, but not always identical.

   1Figures are annual averages and daily averages based on annual
      means.
         Table 6.4  Mexican Crude Oil Exports, 1977-1986
                     (Thousands of barrels)

                 Yearly Total       Daily average  Percent to U.S.

1977                  73,736                 202        88
1978                 133,247                 365        89
1979                 194,485                 533        84
1980                 302,956                 828        68
1981                 400,778               1,098        50
1982                 544,614               1,492        49
1983                 561,005               1,537        54
1984                 558,004               1,525        49
1985                 524,943               1,434        52
1986                 470,704               1,290        51


Sources:  Michele Snoek, El comercio exterior de hidrocarburos y derivados
   en Mexico, 1970-1985, for 1977-1982, p. 72; Pemex, Memoria de Labores,
   annual reports for 1983-1986.



        Table 6.5  Mexican Petroleum Exports in Relation
                  to Total Exports, 1977, 1986
                      (Billions of dollars)

              Petroleum Exports     Total Exports  Percent 1/2
                     (1)                 (2)           (3)

1977                  1.0                 4.6           22
1978                  1.9                 6.1           31
1979                  4.0                 8.8           45
1980                 10.4                15.1           69
1981                 14.6                19.4           75
1982                 16.5                21.2           78
1983                 16.0                22.3           72
1984                 16.6                24.2           69
1985                 13.3                21.7           68
1986                  5.6                16.0           39


Source:  Banco de Mexico, Indicadores Economicos.

Note:  The petroleum export value includes both crude oil and products.
   The crude oil proportion has been 90 percent or more of the total every
   year since 1975, with the exception of 1986, when it was 88 percent.

   Another aspect of petrolization is the role that revenues from Pemex (the
abbreviation for Petroleos Mexicanos, the national oil company) operations, taxes
paid directly and those levied on gasoline and other product sales, played in
financing the budget.  These taxes rose from about 10 percent of federal
government revenue in the mid-1970s to close to 40 percent in 1982.  On a
cash-flow basis, petroleum receipts from export and domestic sales and taxes
rose from about a third of the receipts under budgetary control in the early
1980s to 45 percent in 1984.  When petroleum prices declined, the financing of
the public sector became more difficult.
   The petrolization of Mexico was a symptom of policy measures taken or
neglected.  The intoxication of the oil-driven export boom permitted the
authorities to ignore the need to stimulate exports of other products, particularly
manufactured goods.  The large oil receipts had the natural effect of
strengthening the peso and, on top of this, the political leadership equated a
stable nominal parity of the peso with the dollar with defense of nationalism,
despite Mexico's growing inflation.  It would not have been possible to keep the
official rate of the peso unchanged from late 1976 to early 1982 without the
combination of oil revenues and foreign credit that was so readily made available
on the premise that oil in the ground was ample security for the creditors.  A
thoroughgoing tax reform was delayed until the second half of the de la Madrid
administration partly because oil revenue permitted such procrastination. 
Domestic prices for oil and petroleum products were subsidized despite the
obvious outcome of frustrating conservation; oil reserves and the revenue oil
production was providing were seen as infinite, at least from the vantage of a
single presidential sexenio.

   Once the economic crisis erupted in 1982, these policies became untenable. 
Their correction, however, took place under the most adverse of circumstances,
whereas more forethought might have avoided some of the most severe hardships
that have since been inflicted on the Mexican population.
   It is hard to avoid the conclusion that the Mexican authorities had their
priorities wrong when they set the 1980 oil policy.  Two objectives were met --
limiting total crude production and exports and placing a ceiling on the
proportion of exports going to the United States -- but one objective was not
met -- avoiding the petrolization of Mexico.  The ceiling on exports to the
United States is largely cosmetic as long as the oil production enters the world
market, and the U.S. Department of Energy was indifferent to this limitation
precisely because there is a world market for oil and also because the economic
interest of the United States was well served if the Mexican revenue from oil
exports, to whatever destination, was largely used to buy U.S. goods and
services.
   One assumption of the Mexican decision to limit crude oil exports to the
United States to 50 percent of the total is that a larger proportion would
increase Mexican dependency on the U.S. market.  It is not self-evident that the
seller of a critical commodity is more dependent than the buyer, and the decision
was based as much on Mexican history as anything else.  The 50 percent export
limitation, plus the accompanying limit that no country would be supplied with
more than 20 percent of its crude-oil import needs, also reflected Mexican
concern that if the United States relied too much on Mexican oil, the temptation
for  intervention in a crisis would be great.
   The second objective, that of limiting total production and exports, had a
sounder basis in the desire to avoid both rapid exhaustion of a depletable
resource and the petrolization of the Mexican economy.  But even though
Mexico maintained its 2.5 MMB/d ceiling, it was not clear why it was wise to
borrow heavily in order to limit current oil production, but this was what Mexico
did.  Presumably, Mexican oil planners expected oil prices to rise forever.
   Mexico failed to avoid the petrolization of the economy and in the process
hypothecated the economy to foreign creditors.  Avoidance of petrolization was a
thoughtfully considered objective that should have taken precedence over a limit
on exports to the United States, but did not in practice.  The limit on
production was a means to minimize petrolization, but did not work that way in
the actual policy implementation.  The economic reasons for the failure included
the desire for rapid economic growth and job creation at a pace that turned out
to be unsustainable; the undertaking of projects (including hectic expansion of
investment in petroleum facilities) not carefully thought through, coupled with
excessive government expenditures on what was essentially consumption; and an
unforgivable failure to build in contingencies against adverse shocks to the
economy.  The superficial was accomplished -- the limitation of crude oil
exports to the United States.  The profound -- the thoughtful use of the new oil
resources to develop the economy -- was not. 
   The overall economic planning at the time the energy-production limitations
were adopted in 1980 placed great stress -- it is now clear that this emphasis
was inordinately great -- on the use of oil resources as the springboard for
overall economic growth.  This was explicit in the two major economic-planning
documents of the time, the global plan for 1980-1982 and the industrial-
development plan for 1979-1982.  One element of these plans was to keep
internal oil-product prices lower than prices for comparable products on the
world market; and even to go beyond this, to provide additional subsidies for
energy products when industries were located in specific areas of the country
considered desirable for development.  Mexico's internal oil-pricing policy prior
to the 1982 financial crisis was thus in direct contradiction with the production
limitation, encouraging profligacy in oil use, while the main purpose of the
production limitation was to conserve this Mexican resource through efficient
use.
   Beyond this economic-development motive for preferential pricing, there was
the internal political objective of keeping consumer prices low for gasoline,
diesel, and home-cooking and heating fuels.  Even as late as July 1983, prices
for the most widely-used type of gasoline were the equivalent of 16 cents a liter
in Mexico compared with 32 cents in the United States and 58 cents in the
United Kingdom. Liquid gas cost 6 cents a kilogram in Mexico compared with 29
cents in the United States; and for diesel, the comparison was 9 cents a liter in
Mexico and 32 cents in the United States.  
   The results were predictable.  As economic activity grew and the real prices
of petroleum and energy products declined, consumption increased; the rate of
increase was more than 8 percent a year between 1970 and 1982.  Between
1977 and 1982, when the energy subsidies were at their peak, the annual rate of
increase was 10.5 percent.  The relationship during these latter years between
the growth in energy consumption and growth in GDP was 1.7 compared with 1.2
during the first half of the 1970s.   Energy use was becoming less efficient,
simultaneously with the precisely opposite trend in the United States and other
energy importers.  The major explanation for the difference was the maintenance
of subsidized prices in Mexico and their abandonment in other countries.
   Subsidizing energy prices is not unique to Mexico.  The United States did this
for many years, as have many other countries.  When consumers are used to low
prices for gasoline and cooking fuel, raising them becomes a major political
issue.  Subsidies were maintained in the name of industrial development and
concern about the well-being of the poor, but the outcome was wasteful and the
major benefit went to high-income groups.  The internal prices of petroleum
products began to rise after 1982 when it became clear that the government
could no longer support the subsidies; and these sharp price increases came on
top of other austerity measures facing Mexican workers, particularly a decline in
real income.  Internal energy price policy turned out to be an issue delayed until
the worst possible time.
   Pricing of crude oil on the world market did not escape domestic politics
either.  Mexico did not join the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
(OPEC), but it was clearly sympathetic to the cartel and took advantage of
OPEC's price maneuvers when these benefited Mexico.  Several reasons have
been adduced for Mexico's decision to remain out of OPEC, including the
tradition of not compromising national sovereignty and the fear that the country
would lose the tariff benefits under the U.S. general system of preferences. 
Nonmembership did not mean noncooperation; contacts between Mexico and OPEC
members still take place regularly.  An example of cooperation is the action
taken by Mexico in August 1986 to cut its crude-oil export ceiling from 1.5 to
1.35 million barrels a day and then again in January 1987 to 1.32 million barrels
a day.  As Pemex stated in its bulletin, these cuts were linked to the strategy
and quotas adopted by OPEC.
   Mexico has sought to price its crude based on a formula that takes into
account the prices of competing crudes in each destination.  Because of lower
transportation costs, Mexican crude fetches a higher price in the United States
than in most other markets.  In other words, the ceiling on exports to the
United States may involve an economic sacrifice in the interest of a political
motive of avoiding excessive dependency. 
   Mexico's oil policy prior to the 1982 economic crisis was influential in
devising later policies after de la Madrid became president.  Many of the
features of the old policy were retained, especially the production and export
limitations, but others were altered, particularly those affecting conservation of
energy resources.  But before turning to those later policies, we need to
consider Mexican policy on petrochemicals and natural gas, other important
components of the oil industry, particularly as they affect relations with the
United States.

Other Energy Products
                                  Petrochemicals
   The development of Mexico's petrochemical industry over roughly the past 25 years
has entailed the dedication of a substantial amount of resources.  The industry hardly
existed until the 1960s but, once established, the growth in production of basic
petrochemicals was significant, about 27 percent a year between 1960 and 1980. This
declined to less than 10 percent a year between 1980 and 1985.  Data on production
of the main basic petrochemicals for the years 1965, 1975, and 1985 are shown in table
6.6.
   The word "basic" as used in Mexico requires clarification.  In the United States and
generally elsewhere, basic or primary refers only to olefins (the major olefins are
ethylene, propylene, and butadiene) and aromatics (the major aromatics are benzene,
toluene, and xylenes).  The definition of basic is broader in Mexico; it is also
somewhat arbitrary and is changed from time to time.  The significance of the
distinction between basic and secondary petrochemicals as used in Mexico is that 

              Table 6.6  Production of Leading Basic Petrochemicals--
                             Mexico, 1965, 1975, 1985
                            (Thousands of metric tons)


                                  1965      1975      1985

Acetaldehyde                         -        32       145
Acrilonitrile                        -        20        49
Ammonia                            121       801     2,261
Vinyl chloride                       -        45       108
Dodecylbenzene                      26        72        61
Styrene                              -        27        33
Methanol                             -        32       192
Orthoxylene                          5        15        44
Ethylene oxide                       -        27        71
Paraxylene                           -        32       110
High-density polyethylene            -         -        68
Low-density polyethylene             -        99       160
Propylene                            -        93       207
Butadiene                            -        22        18
Others                             310     2,318     7,896

Gross production                   462     3,635    11,323

Source:  Pemex, Anuario estadistico 1985, pp. 63-68.

- : no production.


manufacture of the former is reserved to Pemex.  Private companies
manufacturing secondary petrochemicals (what elsewhere would generally be
referred to as intermediate petrochemicals and petrochemical products) must be
majority Mexican-owned and be licensed by the government.  More than 110
basic petrochemical plants were in operation at the end of 1985.
   The public-private division was in conformity with the general model of state
hegemony over what were seen as the strategic levers of the economy.  The
state in Mexico, in addition to petroleum, reserves to itself the generation of
nuclear energy, certain mining activities, electricity, the railroads, radio and
telegraphic communication, and, since 1982, commercial banking.  It is not clear
that the state actually chose the most profitable part of the petrochemical
industry for itself since the value added is greater in producing secondary and
derivative products, but it did select that portion which provides it with a means
to control the entire industry.
   There was also concern that the financial entry barrier to private ownership
in the production of basic petrochemicals, an industry which normally requires a
substantial initial investment, would lead to monopoly or oligopoly.  The
limitation of foreign ownership in the secondary industry, actually to only 40
percent as contrasted with a more general norm of 49 percent, was in conformity
with similar limitations in all industries.  
   The tensions that existed between the public and private sectors were
resolved by the compromise of imposing state control over an expansive
definition of basic petrochemicals, but with ample scope for the production of
intermediates and products by the private sector.  In keeping with the overall
tendency in recent years for more privatization of the economy, 36 petrochemical
products earlier classified as basic were reclassified in 1987 as secondary,
thereby permitting private production.  This shift in definition did, in fact,
lead to a number of applications for private-sector production of the newly
reclassified products.
   The petrochemical industry was started at a time when import substitution
dominated the thinking of Mexican industrialization.  Mexico thought in terms of
domestic value added and self-sufficiency, to be reached gradually, for basic
petrochemicals.  But, despite much growth, self-sufficiency has not occurred.  In
1986, Pemex exported 187,890 metric tons of basic petrochemicals and imported
748,438 metric tons, for a deficit of 560 thousand tons.  In value terms, the
Pemex imports in 1986 were $324 million and the exports $29 million, for a
deficit of $295 million.  The basic petrochemical trade deficit had been much
higher in 1985, at $497 million; the difference was mostly in the sharp decline in
imports.  The import figures given above are only for Pemex, not including those
for the private sector, so that the total deficit in basic petrochemical trade in
1986 was around $400 million.  The United States is normally Mexico's main
foreign source for basic petrochemicals, overwhelmingly so in most years, and
generally the most important market for exports.
   The importance of the basic petrochemical industry in Mexico should not be
exaggerated; its production generally contributes less than 1/2 of 1 percent of
GDP.
   
                                    Natural Gas
   Mexico produced 3,431 million cubic feet a day of natural gas in 1986 (1,252
billion cubic feet for the year).  Peak production was reached in 1982 (1,550
billion cubic feet for the year) and has declined consistently ever since.  Most
of Mexico's production of natural gas is associated with crude oil production in
the southeastern part of the country and offshore; together, 83 percent of
natural gas production in 1986 came from these two areas.  What Mexico seems
to be doing is to keep nonassociated gas (that is, gas exploited from fields
unrelated to crude oil production) mostly shut in, which can provide
discretionary margins for both current and future production.  Flaring of
associated gas is not a serious problem; in 1986, 5.5 percent of natural gas
production was released in some form into the atmosphere. 
   The biggest purchaser of natural gas is Pemex itself, for fuel, power
generation, and as a raw material in the petrochemical industry, especially in the
production of ammonia and methanol.  Other large-scale consumers are the
electricity, steel, cement, paper and pulp, and mining sectors.  Mexico does not
now export natural gas -- indeed, it imported minor amounts, $6.2 million worth,
or 1.8 billion cubic feet, from the United States in 1986 -- and therein lies a
story of the sensitivity of Mexican-U.S. relations when it comes to the petroleum
industry.
   The facts are the following: When the growth in oil and associated gas
production in the Reforma and Campeche fields occurred, the Mexican authorities
assumed that excess natural gas over and above domestic needs would be
available and that one practical use was for overland export to the United
States.  A memorandum of intent was signed in August 1977 between Pemex and
six U.S. gas transmission companies for deliveries of up to 2 billion cubic feet
per day by 1979, about 3 percent of annual U.S. consumption.  The first
shipments were to be priced at $2.60 per thousand cubic feet and subsequent
prices were to be adjusted quarterly based on the heat equivalent of No. 2
distillate fuel delivered in New York harbor.  This was eight times the domestic
Mexican price.
   A pipeline, 48 inches in diameter, was planned to transport the gas from
Cactus, in Chiapas state, to the area around Monterrey, from which another line
would go to Reynosa, on the border across from McAllen, Texas.  The total
pipeline would run about 760 miles and be financed in part by a U.S. Export-
Import Bank loan of close to $600 million.  The main purpose of the pipeline was
to make the gas available for industrial and other uses in Mexico itself, but  the
U.S. part of the arrangement was extremely controversial in Mexico.  The left
castigated the government for selling part of the Mexican birthright to the
United States and in the process increasing Mexico's dependence.  Suggestions
were made for liquefying the gas, if exports were necessary, so that other
markets could be tapped, despite the obvious shortcomings of this proposal.
   While this controversy was going on in Mexico, a debate over prices was
taking place in the United States.  Natural gas was still regulated in the United
States and the price of newly-discovered U.S. gas was to be raised to $1.75 per
thousand cubic feet.  Canadian gas in the Pacific Northwest was selling at the
time for $2.16 per thousand cubic feet.  Opponents of the Mexican scheme felt
that $2.60 per Mcf for Mexican natural gas was excessive.  U.S. Senator Adlai
Stevenson III placed pressure on the Export-Import Bank to delay the credits for
the Mexican pipeline until the price of gas came down.  James Schlesinger,
U.S. Secretary of Energy, opposed the agreement both because of the high initial
price and the tie to middle distillate No. 2 since the price of this product was
manipulable by OPEC.  The gas deal collapsed in December of 1977.
   Several years later, in 1979, a modest gas deal was concluded for sales of up
to 300 million cubic feet of gas per day at an initial price of $3.625 per
thousand cubic feet, with changes geared to the price of crude oil.  Had the
original price formula been in existence, the price of Mexican natural gas in
1980 would have been more than $6.00 per thousand cubic feet.  Mexico
several years ago ceased selling gas to the United States, based partly on
continuing disagreements over price but also because Mexico found that it could
use the gas at home, without flaring.
   The interesting aspect of this tale lies less in the details of which side was
right or who charged whom with bad faith -- and there were many such charges
on both sides -- but in the lack of comprehension shown by each side to the
sensitivities of the other.  U.S. scholars could be found on either side of the
issue; Grayson showed sympathy for the U.S. position and Fagen and Nau treated
the incident as an example of maladroitness by the U.S. government.  There may
have been Mexican scholars who showed some understanding of the U.S. position,
but not in print.  This is not unusual.  When there are quarrels between the
Mexican and U.S. governments, U.S. scholars will often side with the Mexicans
but it is rare, perhaps nonexistent, for Mexican scholars to side openly with the
U.S. position.  This undoubtedly is a consequence of asymmetry in economic
power, coupled with a history of suspicion of U.S. motives.
   The negotiation showed that Mexicans who negotiate with the United States,
particularly on issues concerning the petroleum industry, must keep one eye on
the domestic political clamor that is inevitable.  The estimate they must make is
not whether there will be political objections to almost any agreement -- there
will be, cloaked in economic, dependency, sovereignty, security, exploitation, or
other terms -- but the intensity of this opposition when weighed against
economic benefits.  U.S. negotiators sometimes forget this and individual U.S.
congressmen, when they interfere in the negotiating process, are hardly aware of
the internal Mexican context.  For its part, the Mexican government tends to
forget about the separation of powers in the United States and often feels it has
an agreement when it has concluded only one step of a more complex process. 
In the natural gas case, the agreement with the pipeline companies never even
made it through the executive branch.
   
The Politics of Oil
   Many Mexicans had grandiose ideas about the power the new oil discoveries
would bring, especially in bilateral relations with the United States.  Mario
Ojeda, to cite the example of a prominent Mexican analyst, thought that oil was
a two-edged sword in that its presence could lead the United States to offer
trade, financial, and technology concessions to convince Mexico to raise its
production level; but at the same time, that failure to increase production could
result in U.S. reprisals, including even military intervention.  This type of
analysis, a mixture of sophistication and deeply-held suspicion about how the
United States works, was common in Mexico.  The United States undoubtedly was
prepared to offer concessions for a secure source of oil, and undoubtedly still is,
but that it would forcibly seize the oil fields and then operate them at the
maximum technical level of output in order to keep oil prices down, would hardly
be thinkable in official U.S. circles, other than in the fantasies of a Dr.
Strangelove.  President Carter was thought by many to have gone too far when
he described the oil situation as the "moral equivalent" of war after OPEC raised
prices and declared an embargo against the United States, which is quite
different from actual war.  
   The initial U.S. reaction combined technical expertise with ignorance of the
Mexican scene.  Mexico suddenly entered into the consciousness of Americans far
from the border.  The timing of the  discoveries, just after the attempted
embargo by Middle Eastern OPEC countries and the quadrupling or quintupling of
crude oil prices, encouraged this type of strategic thinking.  One immediate
suggestion was to forge a North American common energy market;  Mexico and
Canada had the oil to sell and both presumably had vast quantities of natural
gas.  The United States offered a secure market.  In simple economic terms, the
idea might have had some validity; Canada to this day seeks a market for its
natural gas in the United States.  And in the light of the later collapse of oil
prices, Mexico might have chosen wisely if an oil-supply contract also contained
assurances of a stable price.  
   However, this type of economic thinking, isolated from historic reality,
offered nothing of substance in the first flush of Mexican oil wealth.  Rather
than think in terms of an assured market at a stable price, Mexico opted to
limit sales to the United States.  Even at the lucrative price that the U.S.
pipeline companies offered to buy Mexican natural gas, the opposition to the
transaction was fierce in Mexico. 
   The elements that go into current Mexican thinking about crude oil and
natural gas production and sales in light of the deficiencies of the policies of
1980 include:
   -  Limiting production of crude oil in order to conserve this resource as long
as possible;
   - Limiting exports for the same reason;
   - Cooperate with OPEC to support crude prices;
   - Diversifying markets for crude oil, even if this involves some price sacrifice
because of higher transportation costs to destinations other than the United
States;
   - Recognizing the need for crude-oil export revenue to meet Mexico's
external debt burden and to carry out its development program;
   - Using natural gas produced in associated wells efficiently at home;
   - Facilitating conservation of these depletable natural resources by
encouraging development of other energy resources, such as nuclear, and by
pricing and other policies that discourage profligate use of energy resources;
   - To the extent possible, adding value domestically to Mexico's petroleum and
gas resources, such as through the further development of the petrochemical
industry;
   - And, above all, not repeating the previous experience of petrolizing the
Mexican economy, both directly from oil exploitation and indirectly by
mortgaging Mexico's future development to borrowings predicated on the
existence of oil in the ground.
   These objectives are evident from Mexico's 1984-1988 energy program, whose
main points are set forth in table 6.7.  Many of the details of this strategy are
already out of date, but the overall philosophy that motivated it is more durable. 
What particularly distinguishes the 1984-1988 plan from the earlier policy are the
emphases on pricing energy resources to encourage conservation and the explicit
reference to setting prices in consultation with other exporters (and, as stated in
the plan, with importers; this is included largely for cosmetic purposes and to
take account of Mexico's links with oil importers in Central America and the
Caribbean).
   Mexico's plans include the further development of nuclear energy.  The
troubles surrounding the first plant at Laguna Verde in the state of Veracruz
have included long construction delays, massive cost overruns, and disagreements
with the United States under nuclear nonproliferation initiatives during the
Carter administration.  The Chernobyl disaster occurred more than a year before
the first of Laguna Verde's two 654-megawatt boiling-water reactors was
scheduled to become operational in 1987 and this stimulated intense and
organized opposition to its going on line.  As can be seen in table 6.7, plans
made in 1984 called for a second nuclear plant, but the experience with Laguna
Verde may alter this outcome or at least delay its construction.

                           Viewing the Oil Relationship
   Energy planning in Mexico can be examined in a limited sectoral context, or
more broadly, how energy policy affects the entire economy.   Similarly, Mexican
energy relations with the United States can be analyzed in terms of the effect
on U.S. energy decisions or on the overall bilateral relationship.  
   In the first flush of oil prosperity in the latter 1970s, oil qua oil received
much attention in Mexico's official planning.  Oil as the motor of overall
economic growth was the theme of the main development plans put together in
1979.  However, in a deeper sense, oil and its role in the political-economic
development of Mexico was neglected.  As one Mexican analyst has noted, the
oil revenue could have been the basis for structural reforms which clearly were
needed or, by contrast, been used mainly to finance the traditional growth
policy.  The second alternative was chosen.  Megaprojects were instituted,
public employment was increased, import levels rose, and the economy went
through a short-lived boom.  The structural changes were not instituted until
after the flush of the oil boom had turned into the disaster of the oil bust.  It
was not the oil bonanza that stimulated basic changes in the economy, but
instead the drastic decline in oil revenues.  The structural reforms Mexico
undertook after 1982 were crisis-driven, not oil-driven.  
   The evidence of the post-1982 policy is that Mexico learned from the 1976-
1982 experience to use windfalls constructively.  It is impossible to be certain,
however, that another oil boom stimulated by a surge in prices might not lead to
the abandonment of the current economic modernization efforts and instead
prompt a recrudescence of populist measures.  Unemployment and
underemployment in Mexico are high, real wages have declined, and political
discontent is rampant throughout the country.  These conditions existed in 1976,
albeit to a much lesser extent, and their existence was part of the explanation
for the policies followed at that time.  A new revenue windfall would permit
actions to deal simultaneously with many current problems: spending to enhance
popularity; abandonment of a nonoil export policy because the foreign exchange
from oil revenues would be adequate at least temporarily; and delaying             Table 6.7  Strategy of National Energy Program, by Stages

                         Consolidation Stage,          Diversification and Techno-
Objective                1983-1988                     logical Stage, 1989-2000   


Guarantee self-          - increase crude and gas      - increase installed capacity
  sufficiency                 capacity                 - improve exploitation of
                         - widen electricity                of "dear" oil
                              capacity                 - complete knowledge of
                         - increase secondary oil           country's energy potential
                              recuperation             - reduce dependency on oil as
                         - increase exploration             an energy source.

Assist national          - maintain flexible export    - maintain sector's financial
  economic development        platform of 1.5 MMBD          contribution
                         - gradually reduce internal   - modernize sector by forward
                              subsidies on energy           and backward linkages
                              prices
                         - strengthen forward and
                              backward linkages
                         - strengthen employment and
                              production protection
                              by national procurement

Assist social            - maintain selective          - gradually reduce subsidies
  development                 subsidies for low-       - provide complete national
                              income groups                 energy coverage
                         - promote rural energy        - overcome regional and environ-
                              programs                      mental disequilibria
                         - correct regional            - overcome regional and environ-
                              inequalities                  mental disequilibria
                         - diminish environmental 
                              contamination

Conserve energy by       - eliminate waste and         - promote technological change
  efficient use               irrational use                for conservation
                         - set prices to stimulate     - maintain oil price policy for
                              conservation                  for energy conservation
                         - use technical and financial
                              means and publicity to
                              stimulate conservation
                         - complete specific conser-
                              vation programs

Table 6.7, Continued

                         Consolidation Stage,          Diversification and Techno-
Objective                1983-1988                     logical Stage, 1989-2000   

Achieve a national       - introduce new thermal,      - consolidate coal, geothermal,
  energy balance              geothermal, and hydro-        and nuclear sources of energy
                              electric projects        - extend nonconventional uses to
                         - complete Laguna Verde            rural areas
                              project and start        - diversify nonelectrical uses
                              another
                         - strengthen exploration
                              and evaluation of all
                              energy potential
                         - stimulate cogeneration and
                              other nonconventional
                              energy sources

Strengthen techno-       - consolidate research        - amplify institutional network
  logical autonomy            institutions                  for research
                         - provide technical support   - consolidate technological
                              to providers and users        effort
                         - strengthen training
                         - develop nuclear technology
                         - provide more resources to
                              alternative energy
                              sources, especially
                              solar

Achieve a more           - maintain austerity in       - increase sector's productivity
  efficient and               expenditures             - maintain austerity in
  integrated energy      - improve financial opera-         expenditures
  sector                      tion of CFE1             - achieve consistent growth
                         - eliminate overloading
                         - reach concrete productivity
                              agreements
                         - consolidate intersectoral
                              coordination

Contribute to            - maintain flexible export    - take advantage of opportunities
  strengthening               platform                      to maximize export value
  world hydrocarbons     - continue to fix prices           value
  market                      in consultation with
                              importers and other
                              exporters
                         - maintain principle of market
                              diversification

Source:  Poder Ejecutivo Federal, Programa nacional de energeticos 1984-1988, pp. 70-73.

     1Comision Federal de Electricidad.
diversification in the glow of restored high overall economic growth rates.  A
return to a modified version of earlier policies has a low probability, but it is
not zero.
   The United States really had little to find fault with in Mexico's 1976-1982
energy policy when viewed in the narrow framework of energy.  Crude oil
production built up to substantial levels, as did exports.  Mexico was essentially
a price follower; it did not set the high OPEC prices and no one could have
expected the country not to take advantage of the windfall.  The difficulty over
natural gas sales to the United States was essentially a side show to the broader
picture of crude oil production and exports.  
   The United States, however, was caught up in the Mexican failure to use its
energy resources for modernizing its economy because the collapse of that policy
led to the Mexican government's subsequent drastic measures.  The decline in
GDP coupled with the shortage of foreign exchange led to the sharp reduction in
imports from the United States and the fall in real wages encouraged emigration. 
The lack of reserves to meet debt-service payments required a rescue effort by
the U.S. government.  It was not Mexico's 1976-1982 oil policy narrowly defined
that adversely affected the United States, but it was the failure by Mexico to
use the oil revenue as the basis for structural reform for which the United
States had to pay a price.
   The United States, like Mexico, is presumably wiser today because of the
earlier experience.  The level of Mexican oil production, the proportion exported,
whether to the United States or elsewhere, and the price charged are all
important issues for the United States, but they pale in significance compared
with the role of oil in Mexico's broader economic policy.  The repetrolization of
the Mexican economy would carry the seeds of a subsequent bust.  The
diversification of Mexico's economy, including particularly more efficient
production and export of manufactured goods, is essential for the United States,
just as it is for Mexico.
   This is another way of phrasing the central theme of this book -- that what
happens in Mexico has profound repercussions on the United States.  A headline
placed over an editorial column directed to the United States in 1979 by Carlos
Fuentes read:  "Mexico is...not an oil well."  It was not just the United States
that thought in narrow terms at that time, but Mexico itself, and the latter
mentality was the crucial one then just as the Mexican outlook will be the
relevant one now.

Looking Ahead
   This foray into the future is based on the following assumption: that oil will
be a tool in the modernization of Mexico, but not the critical lever to the
exclusion of practically all other measures, that it was before the 1982 crisis. 
This implies an effort at true diversification, not just of export markets for
crude oil, but of production and exports generally, especially of nonoil exports. 
Further, oil and natural gas must be priced at their scarcity value and not be
used to subsidize other activities if Mexico is to avoid the repetrolization of the
economy.  The price assumption is made both in the interest of oil conservation
in Mexico and to avoid trade disputes with the United States.
   However, since oil revenue will be important to Mexico's well-being regardless
of how effectively Mexico moves into other areas, diversification in oil policy
will also be necessary.  The establishment of the petrochemical industry was one
technique for broadening the contribution of oil and gas resources.  The more
effective use of natural gas at home is also a form of diversification.  
   About 90 percent of Mexico's oil exports are in crude form.  Phrased
differently, Mexico's oil-export fortunes are linked to the demand for crude oil. 
As desirable as oil may be as a primary commodity, compared with, say, tin or
sugar, it is still subject to the vagaries of commodity markets; that is, revenue
from crude oil exports is likely to be more volatile than for products with
greater value added, such as manufactures.  The implication of this conclusion is
that Mexico would be well advised to integrate its oil and petrochemical
industry, particularly the former, downstream much more than it has in the past.
   Specifically, Mexico may wish to enter the retail product market outside of
Mexico, especially in the United States.  Other countries have done this --
Venezuela and Kuwait; and Saudi Arabia is considering similar action.  The
form that this takes, whether a sales contract, joint venture with a group
familiar with retail marketing in the United States, or ownership by Pemex
itself, will depend on such considerations as financing, management needs, and
concern over political sensitivity to a government-owned monopoly competing at
the retail level in the United States.  However, the logic of downstream
integration, from crude exploration and production to refining to the retail level
is that it can reduce the volatility of export earnings.  When crude prices
decline, the crude becomes an input for a retail-level profit center.  When crude
prices are high, Mexico has a choice of profit centers.
   There are many reasons why Mexico might hesitate to commit itself to this
form of downstream integration.  It may not believe it has enough oil to commit
itself downstream, and the initial investment would be high.  It would require
head-on competition with the major oil companies, which have exploited the logic
of vertical integration from the crude oil to the retail level for products.  Pemex
lacks the experience of retail competition since it has had a domestic monopoly
for about 50 years.  There would be nationalistic concern that opening retail
outlets in the United States would increase the economic integration between the
two countries.  
   Mexico would have to confront one other concern if and as it considered
downstream integration into the U.S. retail market.  This is that the United
States might impose an import fee on foreign oil.  Mexico might then be caught
having to provide crude to refineries for meeting its retail commitments when
more desirable crude markets existed outside the United States.  And it would
have to compete with major oil companies drawing a proportion of their crude
from domestic U.S. sources and therefore not subject to an oil-import fee. 
Because of internal opposition, the probability of an oil-import fee being imposed
in the United States is not high, but it exists; moreover, the imposition in 1986
of a higher fee on imported than on domestic oil to help finance the U.S.
superfund demonstrated that discrimination against foreign oil does take place. 
   Mexico faces a dilemma in its arguments against an oil-import fee.  Its most
powerful argument, apart from the adverse repercussions on the Mexican
economy (which in turn would affect U.S. exports to Mexico), is that by
imposing an oil-import fee, the United States would compromise crude exports
from its most secure source of supply -- Mexico and other neighbors.  At the
same time, Mexican policy deliberately limits its supply of crude to the United
States.  It would not be possible for Mexico to have it both ways if the issue of
security of supply became important.
   The best way for Mexico not to be affected by an oil-import fee, if one is
imposed, is to reach a supply agreement with the United States making
operational the argument that Mexico is a secure source of supply, in exchange
for exemption from the fee.  This would involve a hard choice for Mexico,
between the nationalism of energy independence and the necessity to maintain
revenue, but it is a choice that would have to be faced if the United States
does impose an oil-import fee.  
Notes
