





                                     CHAPTER 3

                             Impediments to Integration


   In coming years, those aspects of relations with the United States
which will demand most attention are economic interchange, migrant
workers, and border relations, as well as the general Latin American
policy of both nations.  Mexican National Development Plan 1983-1988.

   Aspirants to political office now peacefully await their turn at
corruption as well as power.  Daniel Levy and Gabriel Szekely, 1983.

   And if the United States is to preserve its economic power and
social progress in an increasingly dependent world, it must be prepared
to exchange goods and services, labor, capital, and technology with
Mexico on a scale unprecedented outside its own borders. Clark
Reynolds, 1983




The Cold Relationship
   The U.S.-Mexico relationship is not warm.  The two presidents meet
frequently, but the encounters are not relaxed.  Bilateral commissions exist for
a variety of themes, such as trade and the environment, but the give and take is
not spontaneous.  Counterparts in the two governments do not communicate with
the casualness that typifies U.S exchanges with colleagues in Canada, the other
land neighbor.  It is not unusual for U.S. officials to act with imperiousness
toward Mexico and Mexicans in turn to respond in ways that are less than civil. 
A stormy history is part of the complexity of the relationship.  Evident
inequalities in political power and economic development add to this complication. 
Different emphases, an East-West dominance in U.S. foreign policy and a North-
South preponderance in Mexican foreign policy, augment other difficulties of
intercourse.  Mexico is usually the demandeur in economic relations and the
United States the respondent and this combination does not make for informality. 
In short, the dialogue is not between equals. 
   The official coldness is reinforced by a critical press in both countries.  The
U.S. mostly relates Mexico's troubles, rarely its strengths.  If all a U.S. reader
or viewer knew about Mexico was what he or she obtained from the media, the
impression would be of a corrupt, inept, and trouble-laden society, important
only because it could cause a mass invasion of illegal immigrants.  If all that a
Mexican knew about the United States was what is contained in the daily press,
especially in Mexico City, the impression would be of a callous, exploitative,
war-mongering country.  
   The coldness of interchange, the posturing in intercourse, the superficiality of
mutual reporting, and the propagation of stereotypes about each other get in the
way of deepening the integration between the two countries.
How Each Sees the Other
   The cold war has been the dominant preoccupation of U.S. foreign policy
since World War II.  Europe takes precedence over other regions in U.S. policy
concerns.  If foreign-policy emphases were based instead on economic self-
interest, Asia would be given priority; the United States trades more with
countries in that region than with Europe.  If trade were the touchstone of
foreign-policy emphasis, the most important countries in the world for the
United States would be Canada, Japan, and Mexico, plus the collectivity of the
European Economic Community.  If future economic potential were the gauge of
policy priority, Mexico would again rank high.  Yet, it is evident that neither
Canada nor Mexico is given the attention on a day-to-day basis that is lavished
on, say, the United Kingdom or France. 
   The United States looks on its relationship with Mexico as superior-inferior. 
Mexico gets attention when its internal problems threaten to contaminate the
United States or when its positions on foreign affairs might frustrate U.S.
initiatives.  And what attention it does get tends to be in terms of rewards and
punishments.  For example, what trade concessions can be granted or what
benefits can be withheld to build pressure on Mexico to take positions that
conform to U.S. desires?  The sanctions, to use the terminology of one student
of these issues, are either positive (granting a benefit) or negative (withholding
a concession).  Positive concessions include balance-of-payments financing, other
trade benefits, purchase of oil for the strategic petroleum reserve, manipulation
of credit from the Export-Import Bank, and the encouragement of credit from
the World Bank and other multilateral institutions.  Negative sanctions have
included the withholding of trade concessions and the refusal to sign a
subsidy/countervailing duty agreement until Mexico altered its treatment of U.S.
pharmaceutical companies operating in Mexico.  
   Rewards and punishments are part and parcel of bilateral relationships
generally, but their dominance in the case of Mexico bespeaks the political and
economic power asymmetry that exists between the two countries.  As one
scholar put it: "If the past is at all prologue, the United States and Mexico will
continue to relate as a world power and a dependent state, rather than as
neighbors bound in global relations of complex interdependence." 
   The tone of this relationship inevitably results in friction and recriminations.
U.S. officials lecture Mexico.  Senior executives of large multinational
corporations repeat endlessly that Mexico will receive significant amounts of
foreign investment only if the 1973 law limiting foreign equity to a minority role
is changed; but the argument to countries that have been even more restrictive,
such as Japan, is phrased in less peremptory terms.
   Viewing Mexico as a problem manifests itself in ways more significant than
condescension.  U.S. government officials openly speculate about the durability of
the Mexican political structure, a type of conjecture common internally in
governments, particularly at moments of travail, but seldom public, as they
became in 1984 when disagreements within the Central Intelligence Agency and
between the CIA and the State Department broke into the open.  A 1986 essay
by CIA analyst Brian Latell, on leave at the Hoover Institution at Stanford
University, which discusses the legitimacy of the PRI and the devaluation of the
presidency under Miguel de la Madrid, attracted much attention in Mexico. 
Latell entered a disclaimer to the effect that his public comments were made in
a personal capacity while at a research institution, but his personal position was
undoubtedly reflected in official assessments before he took leave and after his
return to the CIA.  Latell argued that "...corruption only became rampant in the
years since technocrats and labor leaders have dominated the political system,
and that when professional politicians were more prominent before 1970, there
were few excesses."  The argument is ad hominem (and in my view, nonsense);
but the more important implication is the public denigration by a government
official of the operation of the Mexican political system.
   Two former officials of the Secretariat of Foreign Relations (the foreign
ministry, or SRE in its Spanish acronym) analyzed 1984 coverage of Mexico by
The New York Times, The Washington Post, The Wall Street Journal, Time,
Newsweek, and U.S. News and World Report, and found a number of recurrent
themes: praise for economic austerity, reflecting a financial rather than a
comprehensive view of the Mexican scene; corruption; alarm over social and
political conditions; and Mexican foreign policy, especially in Central America. 
The widely-viewed CBS television program Sixty Minutes focused on corruption in
Pemex, the national oil company.  As an article written by researchers at one
of Mexico City's leading think tanks points out, the common denominator of U.S.
coverage of Mexico has been U.S. national security -- East-West issues, drugs,
illegal immigration, and social instability.
   These are legitimate themes for the U.S. press.  Nor can it be said that
coverage of Mexico is intended by the leading U.S. newspapers, magazines and
television networks to be uniformly negative.  The New York Times, The Wall
Street Journal, and The Washington Post all increased their coverage of Mexico
after 1985 when conditions deteriorated.  The New York Times ran a series of
seven articles in October 1986 which, while they drew criticism in Mexico, were
intended to be fair, even if somewhat sensational.  CBS carried a Bill Moyers'
program on the Texas-Mexico border ("One River, One Country: The U.S.-Mexico
Border) on September 3, 1986, which received praise in both countries for its
even-handedness and sophistication.  However, the overall tone of the media
coverage on Mexico in recent years can best be described as Mexico bashing, so
much so that several leading U.S. newspapers carried either editorials or editorial
articles deploring what one commentator called "the latest simple-minded
sport."
   The Mexican domestic situation is indeed precarious.  Economic hardship has
been substantial in recent years; the political process is not democratic;
corruption is endemic; and drug traffic has corrupted many official institutions,
including the police.  All these developments affect Mexico's relations with the
United States.  There was a jump in illegal immigration into the United States
when the Mexican economy declined; the drug trade corrupts both countries. 
However, Mexico is more complex than these negative phenomena and this
diversity is not being captured in the surge of press coverage.
   The combination of official condescension and media disparagement has done
much to delegitimize the Mexican government in the United States.  Mexican
authorities have contributed to this delegitimation, but foreigners would seem to
have an obligation to couch their criticism in  civil terms.  That this is rarely
done is one more manifestation of U.S. pretensions of superiority.   
   Asymmetry in economic and political power does not by itself dictate a specific
mode of behavior by either country.  Mexico's behavior stems from a composite of
asymmetry, history, and intellectual formation.  Each country's response to the other is
conditioned by the other.  When U.S. comportment is imperious, the Mexican reaction
is arrogant.  When Mexico seeks unrequited economic favors, it is treated as an
inferior.  Attitudinal changes do occur, but they require time.
   Daniel Cosio Villegas, a well-known historian and the father of El Colegio de
Mexico, one of Mexico's leading research-teaching institutions, has analyzed the U.S.
agenda's effect on Mexico on various occasions.  The national U.S. agenda, Cosio
noted, was to spread the nation from the Atlantic to the Pacific and, in its period of
manifest destiny, some of Mexico's territory was in the way.  Mexico's neighborhood
has influenced its policy ever since.  U.S. observers are reminded constantly that
Mexico lost half its territory to the United States more than 100 years ago by way of
introduction to current concerns and resentments of Mexicans toward the United
States.  The border industrialization program of the 1960s, which gave birth to the
maquiladora, or assembly plants, had as one of its motivations to  populate the
northern region against further U.S. encroachment.  To this day Mexicans express
concern about further U.S. territorial ambitions, as Guillermina Valdes-Villalba's
quotation at the head of chapter 8 demonstrates.  
   After it became a continental nation, Cosio observes that the United States required
better transportation and communication between the Atlantic and Pacific coasts; this
led to the cutting of the Panama Canal, and fostered the spread of U.S. hegemony
throughout the continent.  The United States, when it emerged from World War I,
decided "by universal consent" that its "immediate zone of influence would be Latin
America, and Mexico first of all."  Mario Ojeda has asserted that "every time" the
United States acted in foreign affairs on the basis of a "moral imperative" derived
from U.S. ideals, the consequences for weaker countries   have been "unfortunate."
   Mexican analysts tend to implicate the United States whenever something
unfortunate happens in Mexico.  Octavio Paz has stated, for example, that the students
who rioted in 1968 were reacting, in part, against U.S. imperialism, and in commenting
on Mexico's mixed public-private economic system, he said that the country's economic
dependence was accentuated by making the private sector an essential part of the
development program and by permitting the U.S. private sector to participate.  
   Paz has contrasted U.S. and Mexican attitudes in many ways.  In discussing colonial
and post-colonial development and the influence of Protestantism and Catholicism:
"Continuity and change were not complementary terms as in the United States, but
antagonistic and irreconcilable."  Or, in another analysis: "In the United States, the
Indian element does not appear.  This, in my opinion, is the major difference between
our two countries."  On this foundation, Paz argues that the United States was
founded in a land without a past whereas precisely the opposite was true for Mexico,
which is a land of superimposed pasts.  Mexico, he said in 1979, is still asking itself
about modernization but must find its own way to modernity, making the "past...not an
obstacle but a starting point."
   The Mexican emphasis on self-determination, on independence from the United
States, shows up in many ways.  Mexico refused to accept bilateral U.S. aid under theAlliance for Progress, but accepted U.S. assistance given indirectly through multilateral
institutions such as the World Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank. 
Because all aid has its conditions, a distinction was thus made between aid conditions
imposed bilaterally and those exercised multilaterally.  At the same time, Mexico has
no compunction in actively seeking trade preferences for as long, as one analyst put it,
as "...the time required for Mexico to reach maturity."
   A recurring criticism Mexican writers offer is the lack of U.S. sensitivity in the
formulation of foreign policy to the Mexican historical and cultural context in which
the policy is to be carried out.  This theme, which can be found in the writings of
Carlos Fuentes, Cosio, and Paz, undoubtedly has validity.  However, the lack of
Mexican sensitivity to the context elsewhere can also be irritating.  For example,
Mario Ojeda asserted that the Jewish reaction to Mexico's vote in 1975 in favor of the
resolution in the United Nations General Assembly equating Zionism and racism was
"exaggerated."  Ojeda went on to argue that the government's effort to seek a
reconciliation with Israel and Jews generally was "contrary to the national dignity." 
A resolution of the Mexican Senate critical of pending U.S. immigration legislation,
later enacted in 1986, was approved with little understanding of the U.S. context. 
   Mexicans expect the U.S. government to exercise restraint in the face of criticism,
particularly of foreign policy.  According to the U.S. Department of State, Mexico's
position coincided with that of the United States in plenary votes in the United
Nations General Assembly in the fall of 1985 only 14.5 percent of the time.  The only
countries with lower coincidence rates were Guyana, Nicaragua, and Cuba.  Yet the
United States has been asked to tolerate Mexico's position in Central America on the
ground that it helps to paralyze groups in Mexico which oppose the government from
the left.   
   What Mexicans are saying is that positions are taken in foreign policy not only
because they are believed to be correct, but also because they are necessary for
obtaining internal consent for cooperation with the United States in other fields, such
as dealing with drug trafficking.  Responsible Mexican officials also seek to prevent
foreign-policy disagreements from contaminating economic cooperation.  This separation
does not always work.

Salience of Issues
   There is a hierarchy of issues between the two countries, some clearly more
important than others over the long term.  The citation at the head of this chapter
from Mexico's national development plan for 1983-1988 lists what the Mexican
authorities then deemed to be the most important issues in relations with the United
States:  economic exchange; migrant workers; border relations; and policy toward Latin
America (this is a more inclusive way of referring to Cuba and Central America). 
Table 3.1 categorizes issues between the two countries in a different format.  The
bases for the classifications in that table are the importance and durability of issues
and the ability of policy to affect them.  The most important foreign-policy issues in
this framework are spinoffs from domestic policies.  It is evident that foreign policy is
an extension of domestic policy, but the point merits particular emphasis in the U.S.-
Mexico context because of proximity and integration.  Indeed, it is hard to think of a
significant "internal" economic issue in the United States that does not have
repercussions on Mexico. It is equally hard to think of a social issue in Mexico that
does not affect the United States.  The integration of the two countries has become so
extensive that it cannot be avoided even when internal decisions are made in each
country.  
   The category labeled first-order foreign-policy issues in table 3.1 refers to
significant themes which are affected by policy.  The second-order foreign policy issues
receive much attention by governments, but are of lesser intrinsic importance.  Finally,
those issues called durable or basic can affect the short-term relationship (such as
drug traffic) but their importance is in their constancy.  This is particularly
true of water, which is probably the most important single issue for the U.S.
Southwest and the Mexican North.


The Problem of Corruption

   Mexico has the reputation -- at home, in the United States, elsewhere -- of being a
corrupt society.  In reviewing Alan Riding's book Distant Neighbors, in which the
corruption theme recurs throughout, Enrique Krauze commented that Riding,
unfortunately, did not exaggerate: "Connections, patronage, embezzlement, nepotism,
large bribes, the purchase of union favors, blackmail of the press, etc., have thrived in
Mexico."  Lorenzo Meyer has noted that since 1940 corruption has taken the form of
useless projects, inflated project costs, illicit enrichment, and an electoral process that
is no more than a ritualistic formality.
   Nevertheless, it remains most delicate for a non-Mexican to pronounce on Mexican
corruption.  Apart from nationalistic resentment which would arise in any country, the
context in which a foreigner views the Mexican scene must by definition be incomplete. 
But the Mexican public also believes that corruption of officials is a major problem. 
Miguel de la Madrid recognized this by stressing the theme of "moral renovation" in
his presidential campaign in 1982.  Since that time, moral renovation has become
something of a cynical joke among Mexicans; some corrupt officials were punished, but
they did not reach to the very top of the Mexican political structure.  
   The main reason for discussing Mexican corruption is not to titillate the non-
Mexican reader with voluminous specific instances of wrongdoing (which would not be
hard to do, in Mexico or elsewhere), but to ask how corruption, which undermines                       Table 3.1  Hierarchy of Issues Between
                           Mexico and the United States

                                                       Spinoff effects
Type of issue            Internal aspect               on other country

Internal, with external
     repercussions            Maintenance of           Transmission of turbulence
                                social order in Mexico Migration
                                                  
                              
                              Economic growth          Trade
                                in the two countries   Capital flows
                                                       Debt
                                                       Migration
                                                       
First-order foreign-
     policy issues            Economic relations       Trade
                                                       Capital flows

                              Political relations      Degree of mutual
                                                        cooperation

                              Central America          Political cooperation

Second-order foreign-
     policy issues            Votes in United          Effect on
                                Nations                  political cooperation

                              Critical media           Effect on
                                coverage                 political cooperation

Durable, basic issues         Water quality and        Effect on economic                  
                                quantity                 growth
                                                       Effect on political
                                                         cooperation

                              Environment              Effects on:
                                                         Quality of life
                                                         Economic growth
                                                         Political cooperation
                              Drugs                    Political cooperation

                                                       Social and economic
                                                         effects

                              Migration                Social and economic
                                                         effects



trust, hampers Mexican political and economic progress and, especially, the
country's relations with the United States.  The argument is that the forms
corruption takes in Mexico are inherent in the political and economic structure
that has developed, but not in the character of the people.  As the structure
changes (as is now occurring), so too will the nature and perhaps even the
extent of corruption. 
   
                               Systemic Temptations
   Most Mexicans are not corrupt and corruption is viewed with increasing resentment. 
The very fact that each new president promises to reform the system is a backhanded
form of evidence that popular Mexican preferences do not really differ from those
which exist elsewhere, say, in the United States.  But the very definition of corruption
is not a settled matter.  The dictionary offers such words and phrases as evil or
wicked behavior, bribery, rottenness, acts that are morally unsound, and deterioration
from some norm or standard.  What is usually meant is self-enrichment, either
outside the law or based on a person's position.  The acceptance of bag money by Vice
President Spiro Agnew (for which he was not jailed) was clearly corruption; the
enrichment of Representative Fernand St. Germain of Rhode Island while he was
chairman of the banking committee of the U.S. House of Representatives was not
considered corruption by his peers.  Rigging the victory of the PRI in the elections in
Chihuahua state in 1986 was an act of corruption; the practices perpetuating
incumbency in the U.S. House of Representatives are not considered corrupt. 
Acceptance of a bribe to influence the granting of a government contract is evidence
of corruption; acceptance of campaign contributions and then voting in favor of the
interests making the contributions is considered normal politics.  The line between corruption and acceptability is fuzzy.  The United States has its
definitions of when the line is crossed, but these are not universal and not necessarily
optimal.  A majority of U.S. senators are millionaires; most Mexican senators are not. 
It is not clear why position dependent in large measure on wealth  necessarily responds
to a higher ethic than position flowing from party loyalty.  
   None of the foregoing is intended to excuse Mexican corruption or to depict the
United States as a corrupt nation.  Rather, its purpose is to indicate that the patterns
of corruption practiced in Mexico are a reflection of historical development and the
organization of government and society.  The deepest form of corruption of Mexican
society is the unjust distribution of income and the unequal educational opportunities
available to nationals based on their income and place of residence.  The self-
enrichment of a president is obscene precisely because so many Mexicans live below
any reasonable definition of poverty.  
   Most Mexicans experience corruption in its most familiar definition, the paying of a
petty bribe to avoid arrest or obtain some favor.  Police expect mordidas for real or
contrived traffic violations.  Minor officials expect a reward for providing a form or
expediting some licensing procedure.  This type of corruption is ubiquitous in Mexico
and even affects tourists and foreigners seeking to do business there.  But this type of
bribery is hardly unique to Mexico; it is familiar in most societies in which public
officials, especially police, are not paid an adequate wage.  The practice was common
in most U.S. cities less than half a century ago for precisely the same reason.
   This corruption is destructive within Mexico -- it is one reason why the general
population has little confidence in the integrity of government or law enforcement.  It
would be naive, however, to expect this type of corruption to disappear so long as
government budgets are inadequate and the opportunity exists to augment incomes.  
   The main source of substantial corruption in Mexico is the functioning of
government, and the main encouragements are the size of the government, the degree
of discretion allowed in thousands of economic decisions, and the monolithic dominance
of a single political party.  
   Mexico's trade was typified for about 40 years by the use of import licensing as the
main protective device.  The grant of a license could make a firm viable; its
withholding could affect cash flow and, at the extreme, determine a firm's very
existence.  Some general rules defined products for which licenses would be granted or
rejected, but also allowed considerable leeway for administrative flexibility.  Such a
system grants great power to the bureaucracy, and because so much is involved in
discrete decisions, it is a structure tailor-made for complicity between importers-
producers and government officials.
   Foreign-investment is similarly typified by case-by-case consideration of investment
proposals.  As with import licensing, there are general rules regarding the types of
investment that will be approved, but there is also scope for discretion by those
granting the authority.  This structure also maximizes the temptation for money and
other favors to change hands during the negotiation of investment proposals. 
   What is being stated should not be misconstrued.  Not all trade licenses
involved collusion or corruption, and not all foreign-investment negotiations included
improper payments or favoritism to particular Mexicans to share in the fruits of the
enterprise by merely lending a name.  However, the system made these outcomes more
probable than one based on general rules.
   Nothing inherent in the Mexican culture led to venality, then.   It was a system
which encouraged corruption, that is, bribery, collusion, and earning of rents (non-
earned profits) by well-placed insiders.  The old-boy network thrived under this
discretionary system and one of the reasons it has been so durable is that entrenched
privilege is hard to dislodge.
   The state role has been more direct in the operation of state-owned corporations,
the so-called parastatals.  There are hundreds of these, the exact number depending on
the date chosen and the policy of the particular incumbent.  The numbers grew under
President Echeverria; they diminished under President de la Madrid, when many were
divested.  However, key state-owned enterprises are durable and many are extremely
important, such as Pemex for oil, natural gas and basic petrochemical production and
distribution, for electricity generation and distribution, telephone service, steel
production, and many other fields.  Mexico has a unique entity to provide food
throughout the country at subsidized prices to low-income groups; Conasupo (Compan~ia
Nacional de Subsistencias Populares) which, because of its great buying power, can
establish domestic producer prices for many staples.  All non-foreign commercial banks
are now majority government owned.
   There is nothing inherently corrupt in government ownership of operating
enterprises.  Conasupo fills an important need in Mexico and there is nothing in the
form this takes -- operating retail stores throughout the country -- that is necessarily
better or worse than a food stamp or other welfare technique.  Pemex may or may not
be less efficient than other large oil companies -- although there is evidence that it is
not a model of efficiency--but government-owned oil companies are prevalent
throughout the world.
   But state-owned enterprises open vast opportunities for personal profit and political
manipulation.  The government and the PRI are not one and the same, but the
intermingling is extensive. As with trade and foreign investment, Mexico developed a
structure of government-owned enterprises that made corruption inevitable.  This takes
many forms -- job placement, nepotism, self-aggrandizement from purchases and sales,
awarding of contracts, and the ability to be made part of related enterprises so that
monetary benefits could continue long after service in the government-owned enterprise
terminated.  The analogy is inexact, but it is not inaccurate to depict the PRI as a
sophisticated version of the political machines that used to thrive in U.S. municipalities
and states by providing jobs and welfare to adherents and often riches to leaders.  
   One of the favorite whipping boys of observers of the Mexican scene is the union
within Pemex, the STPRM (Sindicato de Trabajadores Petroleros de la Republica
Mexicana).  This is an important labor union, perhaps the single most powerful in
Mexico.  The criticisms leveled against it include enrichment of some leaders, control
over hiring and firing of all Pemex employees save those denominated employees of
confidence (empleados de confianza), participation in Pemex contracts, and control over
gasoline stations.  Of these, the most significant is the control over Pemex's work
force, including the practice of selling jobs in Pemex (vendeplazas).  A union this
powerful was made possible by the monopoly enjoyed by Pemex and the critical role of
oil in the economy.  Once again, however, powerful unions with unsavory leadership
are not unique to Mexico, as witness the Teamsters in the United States.  
   Each structural program was established for a particular reason.  Trade policy grew
out of import-substituting industrialization; the case-by-case negotiating process for
making foreign-investment decisions was designed to avoid foreign domination of key
sectors of the economy; and the basis for the creation of so many government-owned
enterprises was the conviction that state-led development was necessary in an
underdeveloped country like Mexico.  Whatever the merits of these underlying
justifications, structures were established which systematized corruption.  These
structures were mutually reinforcing.  The PRI has remained in power for as long as it
has because it was able to deliver benefits both to the country and to its adherents. 
The trade, investment, and parastatal regimes provided the means to reward priistas.                      Structural Changes Affecting Corruption
   Mexico's economic decline since 1982 has undoubtedly abetted certain forms
of corruption.  As the purchasing power of wages declined, the incentives for
side income have increased.  Most of this has come from perfectly legal means,
such as persons holding more than one job and wives and children going to
work.  Others have coped by seeking income on the margin of legality in the
informal economy.  Petty theft has increased; in a country where walking the
streets at any time, day or night, used to be relatively safe, this has brought
about an unfortunate, but to Americans, familiar change in social habits.  
   Those in a position to extract bribes, like police and other officials whose
services are needed by the general public, are doing so, probably more
consistently than when economic times were better.  There are complaints about
mordidas, but just about everybody pays.
   However, many of the structural bases of corruption are changing.  The
growing clamor for democracy means that the political structure will change; the
status quo is becoming increasingly untenable.  The desire for change came from
within the PRI itself, particularly under the label of the democratic current
(corriente democratica), and from without, from other political parties and
intellectuals and professionals.  Political opening will not eliminate corruption,
but it will inevitably change many of its forms.  If there is a viable political
opposition, the actions of the ruling party will be scrutinized  more closely.  The
words morality and democracy are being increasingly linked in Mexico and this
can have its effect over time."
   There was a tendency in the past to justify corruption on the ground that it
was a stabilizing factor.  Levy and Szekely put this position as follows: "Leaders
who have taken care of themselves are more likely to leave office satisfied than
to plot comebacks.  And corruption decreases the chances of serious attempts at
radical policy change insofar as political leaders have to work their way up by
playing skillfully within the system as it is."  This patronizing argument
suggests that Mexico is too immature to retain stability without corruption; or,
the reverse, that corrupt stability is preferable to the instability of honest
political contest.  
   Other structures allied to the political monopoly are also changing.  The
import system is evolving from one of discretionary import licensing to
protection by tariffs.  When tariffs are used, the permission of a government
official is not needed in order to import.  Foreign investment is still negotiable,
but some generality (not much) has been introduced for small investment in
particular fields.  The significance in the corruption context is the elimination of
an opportunity for illicit gain in the negotiation process.  And finally, the sale
of many government-owned enterprises will reduce patronage opportunities,
though the government will retain vast powers, both directly and through state-
owned enterprises, to award contracts to favored bidders.  All these changes will
not eliminate corruption in Mexico, but they will reduce many of the temptations
and opportunities.
   The structure of political, economic, and social life of a country obviously
influences the way people behave, whether they willingly pay taxes, the respect
they have for authority, and the acceptance of corruption.  Sissela Bok has
noted that there can be a self-justification for lying when an individual
confronts a network of corruption and oppression.  When an atmosphere of
corruption exists, this in turn leads to further corruption, and such an
atmosphere does exist in Mexico.  However, and this is the main point of this
discussion, societal structures as they affect corruption are not immutable.  This
has become evident in the use of special prosecutors in the United States to
examine indications of official corruption in order to free the process from
political influence.  That toleration of corruption has its limits is evident from
the pariah status of former President Lopez Portillo; this was not the case for
previous presidents who used the office to enrich themselves.  The backlash from
the fraudulent elections in Chihuahua and elsewhere have not dissipated.  Major
changes are taking place in Mexico's political and economic structures, and in
the interplay between the two, and these are affecting what until now has been
the resigned acceptance of official corruption.  Corruption will not end in
Mexico, but perhaps its institutionalization will be weakened.
   Mexico pays a high foreign-relations price for its reputation as a corrupt
society.  The government is not taken seriously when it makes statements about
the morality of foreign regimes because the source itself is tainted.  Part of the
condescension that the United States exhibits toward Mexico reflects the instinct
of dealing with corrupt officialdom.  This reaction has been explicit in
statements on the anti-narcotics effort, but it also permeates other political and
economic relations.  This may be unfair, since the United States does not enter
into relations with Mexico with clean hands, but the belief nevertheless remains
that Mexican corruption is not only more pervasive, but that it is internalized
into the country's political and economic structure.  Many Mexicans are
convinced that accusations coming from the United States are designed to bring
the Mexican leadership into disrepute because of its policy in Central America,
but although this motive may exist, it is insufficient to explain the ubiquitious
impression that Mexico is highly corrupt in countries other than the United
States.  And whether or not U.S. beliefs about the extent of Mexican corruption
are accurate, they influence attitudes and policy.  
What Does Mexico Want From the United States?
   Mexican leaders have two objectives at the top of their agenda: maintenance
of political control by the PRI; and steady economic growth.  These linked
domestic political-economic goals affect foreign policy, which is also driven by
the fact that Mexico has repeatedly found itself in the path of drives by a
greater power, the United States.  The essentials of Mexican foreign-policy are
repeated on all possible occasions: nonintervention in the internal affairs of
other countries; self-determination of peoples; and peaceful solutions to
international conflicts.  Mexico mostly follows these principles, but there have
been exceptions, particularly in Central America.
   What Mexico seeks most from the United States is cooperation in achieving
economic growth and sympathetic understanding of the internal political-social
situation.  The historic foreign-policy principles are now mostly rhetorical since
the United States is no longer territorially expansionist or apt to intervene with
troops in Mexico in the absence of some extreme crisis, such as a third-country
invasion.  The principles are important symbols, however, just as the revolution
is; they give intellectual coherence to Mexico's policy in Central America.
   The practical aspect of Mexico's policy in Central America is more than
symbolic, however.  It is designed to neutralize the internal left, thereby buying
exemption from opposition intrigue within Mexico.  It is worth keeping in mind
that Mexico is closer to Central America than is the United States, and that
Mexico has a legitimate stake in events in the region.
     The bilateral foreign-policy agenda is dominated by economic issues,
although these naturally have political consequences.  Mexico wants access to the
U.S. market for its goods and services, with minimum restrictions.  Mexico would
like this access to be preferential, as is evident from the Mexican literature on
the content of a "special" relationship with the United States.  In trade, Mexico
wishes to be treated as a developing country, which in concrete terms means
that it wishes U.S. acceptance of Mexican import protection, domestic-content
requirements imposed on internal production, and legislation and regulations
requiring foreign investors to export given proportions of their production. 
Mexico has opted not to default on its debt obligations, but it does seek easing
of the servicing and the provision of new lending.
   The official record is replete with Mexican-U.S. disagreements on economic
policy, mainly because discord rises to the surface and harmony is taken for
granted.  Most economic interchange between the two countries proceeds
smoothly.  Governments get involved when there is conflict, but most of the
exchange is extra-governmental, between private parties (or between a parastatal
entity like Pemex and private parties in the United States, which is more akin to
private than to intergovernmental exchanges).  Mexico is not necessarily meeting
all its foreign economic objectives; it has not diversified its markets, for
example.  However, the shortcomings are primarily the result of policies made in
Mexico rather than lack of U.S. cooperation.  Mexico does not obtain all that it
seeks from the U.S. government in the economic field:  products are removed
from preferential treatment even when not legally required; the U.S. government
sometimes seeks to frustrate Mexican industrial-policy measures; and practices
that Mexico pursues using the justification that it is a developing country are
sometimes successfully resisted.  On the whole, however, the economic
cooperation is substantial.
   Mexicans are wary of the U.S. response to Mexico's internal political agenda,
however.  The conservative Reagan administration has been more in tune
ideologically with the PAN, the conservative opposition in Mexico, even as its
policy supported the continuance in power of the PRI for reasons of internal
stability.  This duality of sentiment emanating from Washington is evident in
Mexico, and has raised PRI concern that the ambiguity may undermine its
legitimacy and that of the Mexican government itself.  It is in this light that
many Mexicans see the critical press treatment of Mexico as a conspiracy to
denigrate Mexican political practices.
   Mexicans also speculate whether the country's votes in the United Nations
and its policy toward Central America are reasons for U.S. disparagement of
Mexico in other respects.  The Mexican concern is that what was labeled
third-order foreign-policy issues in table 3.1 are overwhelming themes that are
more important in the overall relationship.
   Mexico's policy toward Central America reflects general sentiment in Latin
America, as is evident from the formation of the Contadora group (Colombia,
Mexico, Panama, Venezuela) which sought to resolve the dispute in Nicaragua
through negotiation and the agreement of the presidents of the five Central
American countries to seek peace in the region (the Arias plan).  The policy
toward Nicaragua is in accord with previous actions by Mexico, such as the
maintenance of relations with Cuba under Fidel Castro despite the censure of
Cuba by the Organization of American States.  After all, the revolution is
Mexico's most potent symbol and it is hard for Mexican leaders to be counter-
revolutionaries.  Finally, Mexico's Central American policy is undoubtedly based
on the conviction that Mexico's own security is best achieved by nonmilitary
pacification of the region.  Mexico doubts that it is a potential domino to a
Marxist regime in Nicaragua; and, indeed, it is convinced that potential
aggression is best tempered by good relations with the Sandinista government
rather than by opposition.  (This, however, has not prevented the military from
insisting on budget increases for modernization in order to defend the national
territory from political turbulence in Central America.)  
   Mexico's attitude is also based on opposition to U.S. hegemony. As Herrera
and Ojeda put it: "Obviously, the Reagan government seeks stability in the area,
but with the presumption (pretension) of maintaining U.S. hegemony."  Is
Mexico also a pretender for hegemony in the area?  It undoubtedly was during
the Lopez Portillo period, when it joined with Venezuela to provide aid through
concessional pricing of oil.  It may still be, but Mexico's power to dominate is
less convincing today.  
   Each country, Mexico and the United States, professes that it seeks stability
in Central America.  The means to and the nature of stability is not the same in
the two conceptions.  Yet, it is folly to allow this disagreement to interfere with
other issues of greater significance in the bilateral relationship.  U.S. interests
in Mexico are substantially more important than they are in Nicaragua or
elsewhere in Central America and the Mexican need for good relations with the
United States is of greater salience than it is with countries in Central America. 
Mexico could afford to ignore Central America until the mid-1970s; it cannot
afford to ignore the United States.

What Does the United States Want From Mexico?
   The key U.S. desire is that Mexico remain a socially stable country.  Despite
all the petty irritations, such as foreign-policy disagreements and a press that is
largely anti-American, the United States has been fortunate for the past half
century in having a stable neighbor to the south (as it has to the north).  This
stability permitted the United States to devote its attention elsewhere while
mostly ignoring Mexico, but the reverse was never true.  The asymmetry of
focus has been attenuated since there is nothing like prolonged economic crisis
and political stirrings in a populous neighbor country to alter the national
attention span.
   Stability is not a simple concept.  Mexico is not unstable today if instability
is defined as widespread social disorder.  And while Mexican democracy is
certainly qualified, the country is not an absolutist state.  The stability the
United States would prefer is that of democracy unqualified by descriptive
adjectives, but it is unclear that unqualified democracy would take precedence
over stability in U.S. thinking if the two came into conflict.  The United States
would not want  Mexican Marxists to win a free election, as it made clear in
Chile, a distant country, when Salvador Allende was elected president.  The
stability sought by the United States is therefore a tempered objective --
stability with a regime compatible with U.S. political mores.
   Social stability in Mexico implies economic development.  Economic growth
has been the glue of past stability and its absence is what now raises questions
that U.S. policy could ignore for so long.  If the first policy priority of the
United States toward Mexico is stability and achieving this requires economic
growth, the clear conclusion to the syllogism is that the United States should do
what it can to abet Mexico's economic prosperity.  At this point, the agendas of
the two countries coincide even if particular actions conflict.  If Mexico's future
calls for an outward-looking economy, as the United States has recommended and
Mexico is pursuing, U.S. policy must accommodate this.  The U.S. market must
remain open to Mexican goods and services and capital should flow from the
United States to Mexico; in recent years, the net resource flow has been in the
other direction because of Mexico's debt payments.  Any inclination to punish
Mexico economically for its policy in Central America or its votes in the United
Nations would be self-defeating; the gratification would be momentary and the
damage basic.
   U.S. behavior toward Mexico is mostly defensive -- to prevent instability and
to avoid economic actions that might bring this about.  Mexican behavior is more
aggressive.  It involves taking an independent position on Central America. 
Economically, Mexico seeks to increase its role in the U.S. market. Octavio Paz
has stated that "North Americans consider the world to be something that can be
perfected and ... we consider it something that can be redeemed."  In
comparing each country's foreign relations it is more accurate to state that
Mexico thinks the world is something that can be changed, or perfected to use
Paz's word, and the United States treats it as something that can be maintained. 
In external affairs, the United States is more the status quo nation than Mexico.Notes
    