







                                      PREFACE





   And yet I believe that Mexico and the United States are so far
from resolving their problems that, in truth, it can be said that the
process of understanding has not yet even begun.  Daniel Cosio
Villegas, 1947

   Sociological analysis can tell us only that the development of
democracy in Mexico is within the realm of the probable, owing to the
over-all level of development in the country, and that effective
democracy is the indispensable prerequisite for continued peaceful
development.  Pablo  Gonzalez Casanova, 1965

   We will continue reordering our productive structures and processes
in order to be able to compete in the international economy instead of
locking ourselves inside structures that are, if not archaic, poorly
adapted to the changes in international trade.  President Miguel de la
Madrid H., 1984



   Whether either side likes it or not, geography has made the relationship
between the United States and Mexico the most important one for Mexico and
one of the most important, if not the most significant, for the United States. 
This has long been evident to Mexicans.  It is only now, because of the fallout
in the United States of the protracted economic depression in Mexico, becoming
apparent to Americans (or norteamericanos as the Mexicans would put it).
   This is a book on policy.  The discussion looks to the future but realism
requires that judgments be based on a sympathetic understanding of what has
shaped the present.  For instance, every Mexican school child learns that the
United States invaded Mexico more than a century ago and seized half the
country's territory, and Mexican history books are replete with references to
U.S. economic exploitation.  Young boys who defended their land against the U.S.
invaders and Lazaro Cardenas, who was president when Mexico nationalized
foreign oil company properties, are Mexican heroes, but these events are largely
footnotes in U.S. history texts.  
   While history is the foundation for fashioning the future relationship, the
building blocks are the current situations inside the two countries.  It is
necessary to examine internal developments in order to understand foreign policy,
particularly for two countries as economically integrated as Mexico and the
United States.  The prosperity of either leads to increased exports by the other,
just as economic decline in either leads inexorably to lost jobs in the other's
export industries.  The need to pay interest on the debt to U.S. and other
foreign banks requires that the Mexican population be deprived of these
resources.  U.S. macroeconomic policy that raises interest rates increases the
hardship in Mexico, just as a decline in interest rates permits Mexico to invest
more at home for its own development.  As economic opportunity for individual
Mexicans diminishes, as has been the case during most of the 1980s, the pressure
mounts to emigrate to the United States.  This in turn affects the ethnic mix,
cultural makeup, job opportunities, and politics of those regions of the United
States that receive the immigrants.  
   The interaction between the two countries can be either a positive or a
negative sum game.  As one country grows economically, it pulls along the other. 
As either contracts, the other is also dragged down.  The ideal relationship,
therefore, is one of mutual prosperity, of each country's economic growth
supporting that of the other.  This is the objective that drives the policy
recommendations contained in this book.  
   The citations at the head of this preface were chosen to signal the central
themes of the relationship.  They are the lack of mutual comprehension to which
the famous Mexican historian Daniel Cosio Villegas referred more than 40 years
ago; and the interplay between politics -- the subject of Pablo Gonzalez
Casanova's statement -- and the need for economic restructuring in Mexico, to
which President Miguel de la Madrid was referring.  
   Politics in Mexico is not a purely internal matter since it forms the basis for
the totality of the nation's foreign relations.  The same can be said about
internal U.S. politics, which shape macroeconomic policy and a host of other U.S.
positions -- Central America, drug traffic, trade protectionism, and, more
generally, the ramifications of a growing economic nationalism.  Each of these
positions has a major effect on the U.S.-Mexican relationship.
   Even our language is an issue that can have foreign repercussions.  The two
U.S. states in which the movement is strongest in favor of establishing English
as the "official" language are California and Texas, the very two which contain
the bulk of the Mexican-origin population.   Politics, ethnicity, emotion,
education, and nationalism all come together on this issue.  
   The reinforcing nature of the internal and the external, of politics and
economics, are themes that permeate the analysis in this book.  An appreciation
of the interplay among policy measures is also necessary for understanding the
relationship between the two countries.  Migration is influenced by job
opportunities, income distribution, and the level of wages; the burden of debt
servicing, an economic matter, is a paramount domestic political issue in Mexico;
trade and industrial policies in the two countries affect incomes and the level
and quality of their employment; the rapid growth of the population along the
border is reshaping the economics, politics, culture, indeed, the very pattern of
thinking of the people who live there.  Chapters are divided into themes like
trade, industry, oil, debt, the border, and migration, but this is for convenience
of exposition, not because the issues are truly separable.  It is not possible, for
example, to think of drug use in U.S. cities without bringing into the analysis
Mexico's drug-eradication program, the factors influencing demand in the United
States, the profits generated by the traffic, and the corruption made possible in
both countries by the vast sums of money involved.
   Economics, or themes which derive from economics -- such as migration --
are at the heart of the U.S.-Mexico relationship.  Mexico is not powerful enough
and the U.S. is too powerful for Mexico even to consider arming against U.S.
predation.  Neither country poses a military threat to the other, and there is no
nearby powerful enemy, such as the Soviet Union, whose proximity so thoroughly
influences the U.S. posture in Western Europe and Asia.  Yet the economic
aspect of U.S.-Mexican relations is sometimes subordinated to what should be
extraneous features of the relationship.  These include the opposing outlooks on
Central America, disputes on how to control drug production and traffic, and the
instinctive reaction in the United States that pervasive corruption in Mexico
makes cooperation difficult.  These issues are dealt with in the book precisely
because they embitter the relationship.
   One other impediment to cooperation is the fact that the  relationship is not
a warm one.  Neither country has much affection for the other.  This may be
inevitable; the United States is a world power and Mexico a struggling
developing country.  Annual per capita income in the United States is now about
$17,000; in Mexico less than $2,000.  The Mexican culture is Hispanic and that of
the United States, while complex, derives much of its sustenance from a British,
non-Latin tradition.  Mexico was the territorial loser and the United States the
gainer in their nineteenth-century war.
   All these differences complicate but do not preclude cooperation.  Lack of
affection has not prevented the French from working harmoniously with West
Germany since World War II, to cite but one example where history would have
predicted continued conflict but where conscious policy decisions brought
cooperation instead.
   The Mexican economy has been disastrous since 1982, the entire span of
President Miguel de la Madrid's six-year administration, or sexenio as it is called
in Mexico.  The gross domestic product (GDP), after discounting for inflation,
remained about the same after 50 years of steady expansion of about 6 percent a
year.  Since population has been increasing in recent years at about 2 percent a
year, the decline in per capita income over the six-year period of the de la
Madrid administration totaled about 15 percent.  Take-home pay of wage earners,
that is, salaries after accounting for inflation, fell during the sexenio by 50
percent.  The wage earners were the lucky ones; they had jobs.
   Unlike many other Latin American countries, inflation was not a major
problem during Mexico's halcyon half century of economic growth, but rose to
160 percent in 1987.  As recently as 1981, the exchange rate was 24.5 pesos to
the dollar.  It is hard to keep daily track of the rate these days; it took more
than 2,300 pesos to buy a dollar in the early months of 1988.
   Disaster, however, is not the complete economic story of the de la Madrid
sexenio.  President de la Madrid inherited rigidities that contributed to the
economic decline during his watch that included a mostly inefficient industrial
complex protected from competition, an elaborate system of government subsidies,
and a public-sector deficit that was running out of control.  Mexico is now
going through a profound change in its economic structure involving rapid
opening of the market that is forcing domestic industrialists to compete.  The
depreciation of the exchange rate permits Mexican producers to export to world
markets.  From an economy that looked inward, the changes during the de la
Madrid sexenio forced Mexicans to cast their gaze outward, and join the rest of
the economic world.  This is a transformation of historic proportions, and now
that the economy is being opened, it can no longer be turned back to the earlier
closed model.  The longer the economic opening endures, the more irreversible it
becomes.
   The Mexican economy is opening at an unprecedented rate, but the political
structure is opening at a snail's pace.  The contrast between the two could not
be more stark.  The official party, the Institutional Revolutionary Party (Partido
Revolucionario Institucional, or PRI) has never lost a presidential, senatorial, or
gubernatorial election since its formation (under another name) in 1928-1929 --
sixty years of political control is a long time in the modern world.  Even the
word "official" which is habitually used to describe the PRI is revealing.  A
democracy should not have an official party.  The PRI has provided the symbols
of democracy without the reality, and there is no evidence that PRI is prepared
to allow this situation to change.  
    Is this disparity between economics and politics tenable?  A main theme of
this study is that it is not, at least not for long.  Mexico is too developed a
country, too steeped in the rhetoric if not the practice of democracy, to prevent
political opening in the near future.  The growth of democracy elsewhere in
Latin America has added to the drive for a more open political structure in
Mexico.  The authorities lack any moral international standing in the absence of
a truly popular mandate at home, and as a qualified democracy, Mexico cannot
play the role on the world stage to which it aspires.    
   When the Mexican economy faltered in 1982, its authorities looked outward. 
As the U.S. economy over the same period has experienced setbacks in the form
of large trade deficits, there has been an opposite tendency, to look inward.  In
the full flush of earlier confidence, U.S. authorities advised Mexico to play a
more active role in the world economy.  Now that Mexico is doing so, the
United States is turning unto itself in its economic policies.  Synchronization of
the two countries' industrial and foreign trade policies has been elusive.
   But another major theme of this book is that such policy synchronization of
two countries whose economies are already highly integrated would serve both
well.  Their integration can be resisted, as it often is through restrictions on
the import of goods, services, capital, and people by one or the other of them. 
It can be allowed to proceed as the market dictates, which requires an
essentially laissez-faire policy that neither country is prepared to accept.  Or it
can be encouraged by mutual policy frameworks that give the promise of
consistency.  The recommendation in this book is that encouragement will serve
to raise incomes in both countries by exploiting the advantages that each
possesses.  
   Relations between Mexico and the United States are carried out on two
levels, the substantive and the stylistic.  The official intercourse is more formal
than it is friendly, and at times can be patronizing and rude.  A Mexican
speaker can win applause from a domestic audience by describing relations with
the United States as unequal, exploitative, or even imperialist, in short, a
relationship that benefits the United States more than it does Mexico.  A U.S.
speaker earns nods of concurrence by describing Mexico as corrupt,
antidemocratic, and inefficient, then using these characterizations as justification
for noncooperation.  Both sides play the scapegoating game, but this is zero-sum
thinking.  These denigrating approaches, found in speeches by politicians, in
official documents, and in the media, contain elements of truth, half truth, and
outright distortion, and they surely frustrate cooperation.  The United States
does not respond graciously when accused of being economically imperialist. 
Mexico cannot be expected to behave obsequiously when it is publicly charged
with being corrupt.  
   The United States is often unbearingly condescending.  U.S. officials denigrate
Mexican authorities in ways that are unthinkable when dealing with other allies. 
The U.S. ambassador to Great Britain would not last long if he regularly and
publicly lectured the British government on its policy shortcomings, but John
Gavin, who was U.S. ambassador to Mexico for five years until May 1986, did
precisely that to the Mexican government.  It would be remarkable for a
subordinate U.S. official to openly charge senior French authorities of complicity
in the drug trade, yet William von Raab, commissioner of customs, did just that
against Mexican officials during a Senate hearing on May 13, 1986.  One can
hardly conceive of a Senate vote threatening reprisals against the Federal
Republic of Germany based on an unconfirmed (and ultimately false) report that
a Soviet warship was about to visit a German port, but a third of the U.S.
Senate did exactly that in September 1985 with respect to Mexico.  There were
no hearings, no attempts at verification, just a gut reaction that this action was
routine in dealings with Mexico.  
   Much effort is invested by Mexico to separate the verbal from the
substantive; most of the verbal excess is directed to domestic audiences and not
intended for U.S. ears.  The attempt to separate audiences also shows up in
disparate approaches to foreign political and foreign economic policies.  The first
is heavily ideological, the second much more practical.  Stephen Krasner has
noted: "Foreign policy has long offered Mexican political leaders opportunities to
resolve some of the tensions inherent in their political situation."  Jorge
Castan~eda has asserted that cooperation with the United States on drug control
and treatment of foreign direct investment requires the demonstration of Mexican
independence in other ways, particularly by opposing U.S. policy toward the
Marxist regimes in Cuba and Nicaragua.
   The discussion in the following pages focuses on the substantive rather than
the stylistic.  Yet the latter poisons the former; internal and external audiences
cannot be separated.  Those who make U.S. policy hear and read what is said
and printed in Mexico.  Foreign political policy cannot be divorced from foreign
economic policy.  New presidents in each country are beginning their terms more
or less simultaneously at the end of 1988 and the beginning of 1989.  They can
set a courteous tone in the discourse between the two countries, both by
example and by punishment of those officials who overstep the bounds of
decency.  
   My approach is more practical than ideological.  Stanley Hoffman has written
that "It should be easy to understand that pragmatism, which ought to be a
universally valid approach, becomes highly parochial when it is so deeply rooted
in a unique experience...."  I admit that the conclusions of a pragmatist from
the United States may differ from those of a Mexican pragmatist.  
   Two other important values are brought to this study.  The first is the
conviction that democracy, unfettered by qualifying adjectives and stultifying
limitations, is the only modern system for a country that has pretensions to play
a moral role on the world scene.  The second is that a just society requires a
more equal distribution of income and of education, health, and other vital
services than exists in Mexico.  Mexico's income distribution is one of the most
unequal in the world for countries at its stage of development.
   There are other pairs of countries whose destinies are intertwined.  These
include Canada and the United States, France and Germany, Australia and New
Zealand.  But in no other case has fate placed populous countries so disparate in
levels of economic development and cultural tradition next to each other as are
Mexico and the United States.  These differences make the challenge of
cooperation extremely delicate and difficult, but geography leaves no other
choice.  
Notes
